Meeting is called to order.
And welcome everyone. This is a workshop.
Um, I will ask the superintendent to take the role.
DeAngelo. Here. Dowling. Here. Feller. Here. Holman. Here.
Richardson. Here. Rish. Here. Smith. Here.
Kabisa. Here. Davidson. Here. Davidson Here.
So I will just say, as this is a public meeting, uh,
unless the Board of Education specifically votes
to enter into executive session, the public has the right to
hear everything that is being said.
And to look at any exhibits that are being offered.
Please notify us
by raising your hand if you're unable to see or hear.
Just a reminder to the board that Robert's rules of orders,
uh, states
that members may speak no more than two times on any item,
uh, unless given permission by the chair.
Uh, before we begin our meeting, I wanted
to make some opening comments
because I expected this was gonna be a full house.
So I wanted to say, uh,
we've received many emails from parents,
and we hear your concerns.
We understand there are many of you
who do not support the idea of reconfiguration.
We're not ignoring you. This is challenging,
and I'm confident in saying that everyone up here
has thought of little else over the past several weeks.
So, here are some answers to questions.
First, we started the budget process in December,
as opposed to March.
We have been announcing since spring
that this year's budget would be even more
challenging than last year.
Second, we conducted two budget forums, one in person
and one virtual as asked, and we included an exit survey.
Third, there have been thus far, two meetings
with union leaders to offer ideas being considered
to answer questions
and to accept any additional thoughts that they may have.
Fourth, all our meetings are public and televised
whenever possible, and all slides
and data are posted on the school website.
Fifth, notes and dates are sent by principals through reach.
My Teach six, we've had two budget workshops so far.
Tonight is the third, and there are three more.
All opportunities for your ideas.
Everything we know is public
and nothing is happening in secret.
One is an, uh, an added workshop, which is March 16th,
and either the 16th or the 23rd.
I don't have confirmation yet from the Director of Parks
and Recs, but one of those will be at the Red
Bank Community Center.
Dr. Prince has developed a link on the school
website for questions.
Um, eight meetings
and information have been posted on both the school social
media sites and the cities.
Nine. There has been a question about Mahoney,
and I wanted to answer that.
Um, first, the school department no longer owns Mahoney, so
that has been turned over to the city.
So, um, it was decommissioned as a school,
and in order for it to be recommissioned as a school,
the city would have to turn it back over to us.
We would need to meet all the current requirements now
that were, that do not exist in Mahoney,
which would likely be multimillion dollars to do.
So we got the funding
because of the condition of the school.
And so if we were to try to recommission it,
we could potentially owe what the state gave us in funds
to build Memorial.
So I just wanted to give that information
so people understood why that's not under consideration.
And the last, everyone is invited to write to board members
with ideas or concerns.
That is mostly to say we're doing everything we can.
We are not perfect. And there might be another idea.
However, we have done a lot.
There are things that I would remind folks first,
no one up here thinks that he or she knows everything.
Secondly, this job is not easy.
Third board members received a thou receive a thousand
dollars stipend for an entire year.
And some don't even take that.
So no one is doing this for the money. Everyone.
This is no one's full-time job.
Although some days like today, it feels like it is.
Everyone up here considers the impact
of all decisions on families, kids,
and all city residents.
While the majority of the folks who come
to our budget meetings are educators
and parents, over 80% of our constituents
do not fit into those categories.
They too pay 61% of their property taxes to education.
And this board must represent their interests
and needs as well, even if they're not here.
And this one is really important.
We do not have a $7 million shortfall or a deficit.
We do not owe money, which is what
that would mean if we had a deficit.
The $7 million is the amount we must cut
to bring an increase of 6% first, back to the council
and then to the voters.
We do not have any money in reserve.
Many people have asked, how did we get here?
And while this question has multiple answers, one is
that we have had declining enrollment of 300 students
with an increase in staffing of 82 staff members
to go back to the voters with no changes in any area,
would result in a 19% increase in our budget,
and approximately a 17% increase in property taxes.
Most would not consider that a reasonable option.
Making cuts to come within 6% guidance is not a question
of if, but it is a question of how
we are here in public.
To hear your ideas
and your solutions rejecting all ideas
to say it needs to say the same is not likely an option.
Please understand that we care.
We want to do good things for kids,
and we want to consider all residents.
And we are listening. Thank you.
So I'm gonna go to the superintendent, uh,
proposal redesign, let people
Front. There are,
and there are. Thank you. Uh, member Holman.
There's two rows here of empty seats in the front.
If you would like to be brave
enough to come down to the front.
They're, they're here.
There's spattered seats, um, throughout.
Thank you very much. Um, I'm gonna go
to the superintendent proposal
and redesign
of the elementary school grade level configuration.
Oops, sorry.
So do we just have, um, some news, uh,
if I'm right here, um, uh, who, uh,
hasn't had enough snow this winter?
Uh, so, um, it's been a lot of fun.
It's time for it to end,
but we're, there's no guarantee that's gonna happen.
Um, we have a couple of options.
Um, we are ready to transition, uh, to a,
um, not a snow day, but a remote day.
But that will only happen if in fact, uh, let's see.
Uh, it would be day five.
Um, and if that happens
after, uh, March 9th, um,
day five and beyond, uh, will be
remote option will be remote learning.
Um, option two, um,
that we're looking at is day five happens between, uh,
now this moment, like right, this very moment
and march, uh, sixth.
And there is some talk about snow coming
that will actually be a traditional snow day.
So some of you like snow days, some of you don't.
Um, it could go either way,
but we wanted to, um, uh, just let you know
because that's just been decided.
Thank you. Welcome
to the board's budget workshop.
Um, thanks, uh, to those of you who have weighed in,
written and weighed in on the conversation related
to our elementary schools, this is the first
of four workshops schedule in March.
So the workshops are numbered,
but they are only the ones that we've had, uh, in March,
as Rosemarie has said.
Um, we've had, uh, earlier, uh, workshops
and, um, budget forums.
March is for all of us, uh, the time for the board
to work closely with the leadership team
to evaluate proposals that will impact the budget,
the initial version, um, of which, uh,
will be brought forward.
Uh, at our regular meeting on March 9th, the first March,
March workshop.
Uh, preempts the board's reading
of the superintendent's initial budget.
But other than being one step ahead of the board, uh,
the board's, uh, view, uh, it's, um, uh, uh, my propo, uh,
I'm sorry, other than being one step ahead of the board, um,
of, of my proposal, uh, draft the budget draft, uh,
it involves a full
and extensive, tonight involves a full
and extensive dive into the structure
of our elementary education program.
And I suspect that that's why a lot of folks are here.
Um, it does require additional time and consideration
because of the scope of the evaluation
that's being undertaken.
This is not to say
however, that this segment of the review
represents all of the organizational
and structural review work that is planned
for the budget development.
The other three workshops planned for this month
of March will examine initiatives focused at the middle
school and at the high school as well.
And we'll focus on examining initiatives impacting all
of the cost centers of the district.
It's important to recognize
that this is a sequential process
of consideration and deliberation.
It's also a process of dialogue that allows for learning
and understanding to take place over time.
And there's a lot of learning for all of us.
The purpose of these budget workshops is to provide time
for the board and the leadership team working together
to carefully review
and consider adjustments across all the cost
centers of the district.
This is a critically important time for board members
and leaders coming together tonight
as the school district's executive team to have dialogue
and strategize in a way that will allow us to together
develop a responsive budget that will not only
best meet the needs of our students,
but also be responsible as it relates
to the financial parameters, uh, given to us by the board
and the city council.
Each workshop will provide opportunities for comments
for the public, uh, uh,
and you can make those comments to the board.
Tonight's workshop, I think you'll soon realize,
reflects many tens of hours of research
and analysis performed by our assistant superintendent,
Dr. Joe Prince, and our finance director Abigail Chen,
as well as significant expert analysis
and planning that's been done by our team of administrators
and directors, many of whom are here tonight, focused on
what is best for our students academically
and operationally as a district.
The letters from the community members,
and I've read them all, um,
and I referenced them earlier, asked lots of questions.
The work of Joe and Abigail, um, will answer many
of those questions tonight.
I have to say that Joe and Abigail
not only have demonstrated their capacity
to answer these very hard questions, but they
and our leadership team have also clearly demonstrated their
commitment to prove, to provide options that are good
for learning and good for kids.
We have a large amount of information to share
with the board tonight.
We kindly ask board members that if you have questions,
please make a note of the slide, a number
and, uh, that you would like to return to.
And we will and hold the question
until the presentation is complete.
Thank you.
Thank you. Um, Mr.
Superintendent, and I think that we're going to begin
with y someone.
We, we are going to begin with. Um,
I was going to say Dr. Prince,
but it's not, it's somebody else. So, uh, Lori,
I'm your someone tonight. Okay.
Thank you, Alki. And she is the principal of small.
Yes. Good evening. Thank you.
We can just refrain from clapping.
I would really appreciate it. Clapping, booing, all of that.
Um, we're just, I wanna prepare you for that
because we're gonna have a lot of speakers
and we, that's going to just take time,
not allowed publicly.
So we're just gonna ask you to refrain from that. Thank you.
Good evening and welcome. My name is Lori Kolsky
and I am the principal of small elementary school.
Tonight, members
of our leadership team will present the information
requested by the board to consider options related
to the elementary schools and the budget for FY 27.
Over the last two months, as we have had
to consider the budget challenges ahead,
our entire team has been collaborating on the potential
options for moving forward.
Good evening. I'm Sarah Glenn,
principal at the high school.
So, to begin our presentation, we're going
to share information about the demographics
of our current five elementary schools.
We do have a long tradition of ensuring
that students from across our district,
when they graduate from our school,
are all South Portland alumni,
regardless if they have been in the district for one year
or 13 years.
Hello, I'm Rebecca Stern,
the principal of the middle school.
Uh, this is my 10th year in South
Portland as an administrator.
And notably, I have been here through the merger of Mahoney
that we spoke about moments ago and Memorial Middle School.
And if we remember all of the fifth graders from all
of the elementary schools at that time, um, we do
as a district and a community, have experience
with really hard change when it comes to changing
where kids go to school, um, and schools closing.
Um, with intention and focus,
we have created a five eight school
that is stronger together.
The anticipation of the change was very difficult
for families, for students and staff.
Um, but there is a really strong sense
of connection now at South Portland Middle School.
Um, I just want the board to know
that whatever you do decide,
the middle school community is here to support, um,
and make that change.
Whatever change you decide to do, um, easier if possible
with the things, the lessons that we learned from
that merger from a few years ago.
Thank you.
Hi, I am Bethany Connolly.
I'm the principal of Skill and Elementary School.
Um, so I want to share
with everyone a high level budget overview
and just remind the board
and the public that this evening we are focusing on, um,
the options related to elementary schools only,
but that all areas
of the budget will be discussed in the coming weeks.
Um, so on this slide you can see a visual.
Um, there are many ways that we can look at a school budget,
and one way is by level.
So in this pie graph,
you're seeing the spending at each level
and, um, can see
that elementary schools do in part to their being.
Uh, five buildings are the most costly level at
37.4% of the whole school budget.
Um, on this next slide, this is a list of all the areas
that will be considered, um, as we work through, um,
the, the budget challenges.
Um, and again,
as super Superintendent Entwistle shared at the start
of the meeting, we will be looking at all areas
of our organization,
but tonight is focused on the elementary school.
Good evening, I am Myra Karen,
principal at Kaler Elementary School.
On slide 10, you can see the elementary school, uh,
is highlighted as this will be the focus
for tonight's presentation.
In upcoming meetings,
we will address all other areas listed here
this evening, the team will share multiple models
and options for how the elementary schools might be able
to reduce costs.
It is important to note
that these models do not all have the same short
or long-term costs.
In slide 11, you can see
how the choices we make at the elementary school
may impact the choices we have to make in other areas.
Inside 12, we wanna show the timeline
for budget development,
including an added workshop on March 16th.
Thank you.
Hello, my name is Beth Kellogg.
I'm the principal at Brown Elementary School.
As we begin looking at possible elementary school options,
we thought it would be helpful to start
with a quick overview and a reminder of
where things currently stand across our elementary schools.
We operate five elementary schools with pre-K,
currently offered to 64 students
in four classrooms across the district with two at Dyer
and two at Kaler.
In slide 14, you can see our current attendance zones
for the five elementary schools with the location
of each school circled in black.
Finally, on slide 15,
you can see the changes in enrollment over
the last few years.
Hi, good evening. Um, I'm Allison Hopkins.
I'm the principal at Dyer Elementary.
Um, in addition to looking closely at our enrollment
numbers, the leadership team has also taken time
to examine the differences in demographics
across our elementary schools.
As we know from the two years of work done by the Boundaries
and Configurations Committee,
there are significant differences in the diversity
of our student populations at our elementary schools.
As a leadership team, we know that moving towards, uh,
schools that are more closely,
that more closely reflect the diversity
of our overall student body will benefit all learners.
Here in slide 16, you'll see the percentage
of students qualifying for free or reduced lunch by school.
Um, and that is dating all the way back
to 20 16 20 17 school year.
The green and yellow lines represent skill
and KA in the 50 to 60, uh, percent range,
while the blue, red, and orange represent brown dire
and small respectively in the 20 to 30% range.
In slide 17, uh, this graph represents the percentage
of students who identify as black, indigenous,
or people of color across our elementary schools,
the percentage, um, ranges from nearly 60%
at skill in to less than 20% at small.
Highlighting the variation in student demographics across
the five elementary schools.
Thank you.
Hello, I'm April Perkins, director of Multilingual Programs.
One of sps D'S greatest assets is our
linguistic and cultural diversity.
Currently across the district, 18%
of our students are multilingual learners in the
process of learning English.
Further, a remarkable 26% of our students have a primary
or home language other than English.
Our students and their families speak at least 40
different languages.
In addition to English with Portuguese, Spanish,
French, and Al.
As the top four multilingual learners receive specialized
instruction, um, for English language development tailored
to their current level of skill.
Alongside this specialized instruction, we believe
that it's important for multilingual learners to spend
as much time with their English speaking peers as possible.
As this integration benefits both types of learners
and our community as a whole.
However, across our five elementary schools,
the percentage varies widely from just 6% at small
to 33% at skill.
In that means that the learning experience
and opportunities of each student also vary widely.
As Principal Hopkins shared, there are many benefits
for all students in attending diverse schools.
These include developing superior skills for communication,
flexibility, empathy, and problem solving.
Reevaluating the structure of our elementary schools is a
key step to empowering all South Portland students
to attain these critical skills.
In addition, greater parity
and demographics would enable us
to more effectively group multilingual learners
for their English language development services
and create greater efficiency
and consistency of these services within and across schools.
Thank you.
Hi, I'm Sonya Croft.
I'm, um, an Assistant Director of special education here.
Um, so we wanted to provide you
with some information about our current students
and services and some of the responsibilities that we have
that have impacted budget related conversations.
So our department's responsible for ensuring
that all students with disabilities have access to our free
and appropriate public education
and the least restrictive environment as possible.
Um, and appropriate. So we have federal
and state laws that govern all functions
of their special education processes,
which we typically navigate through IEP meetings.
We currently serve 618 students.
That's an October one child count.
That's how we have that information.
Um, and we, on the left hand side, it
provided you the snapshot of the 13 eligibility categories
and how our students are distributed
within those categories.
Generally speaking, in South Portland,
we have four main types of classrooms
and programming, um, that support our students.
We have resource composite classrooms.
We have developmental life skills
and transition classrooms, um, social, emotional
and behavioral classrooms.
And then we also, um, partner
with our special purpose private schools who offer students
who require a higher level of care than we can offer,
which would be referred to as out of district students.
Um, and then within this context of programming,
we also offer related services, um, such as speech
and language, ot, pt, um, o occupational therapy,
physical therapy board Certified Behavior Analysts,
and Social Work Services.
And lastly, we thought the board would, um, might wanna know
that we also oversee special education processes for, um,
our two private schools located here in South Portland
for Holy Cross and Greater Portland Christian School.
Um, our responsibilities
for those students are a little bit different than
what we have for public school,
but we also, um, continue to retain child find evaluation,
um, and individual service plan
responsibilities for those schools.
Hello, I'm Trina Primo.
I'm Assistant director for special education.
Uh, we wanted to also share
with you two major legislative changes
that have impacted our budget conversations.
Um, the first one took effect in 2023 when the state began
requiring public schools to provide special education
and related services to eligible students until they turn 22
or until they earn a regular high school diploma,
whichever comes first.
Prior to this change, students were eligible
for programming only through age 20.
As a result, we've had to rethink
and expand our transition services at the high
school for eligible students.
This programming focuses more on instruction
that supports transition into life
after high school, including skill areas such
as career readiness, independent living, community access,
and preparation for post-secondary education and training.
Um, the second major change occurred more recently in 2024.
Uh, the state is now requiring that public schools begin
to take on their responsibility
for the special education needs
for children ages three and four.
So beginning September 1st, 2026,
we will assume the responsibility
for serving 4-year-old students who are eligible
for special education services.
Based on our current data,
we anticipate serving an additional 80
to 90 children next school year as a result of this change,
um, which increases our child count to around 700, um,
from pre-K to grade 12.
Uh, the following year, we will then expand
to include services for 3-year-old students.
Um, again, we will need to rethink
and expand our current programming.
Uh, pre-K services focus on early developmental skills such
as communication, social interaction, sensory,
emotional behavior regulation, and early motor development.
Often these services are delivered through embedded routines
and natural environments rather than more traditional
classroom instruction.
Hello. Um, I'm Hilda Powell,
and I'm the Director of Diversity, equity,
inclusion and Belonging.
As my colleagues have shared, there are benefits
for students attending schools
with some, with their diversity.
This include the five listed here,
and I would love to explain a little bit each of them.
When the first benefit. Research shows that
once you control the background factors, students in Russian
and economically mixed schools
demonstrate 30% more growth in tested score over high school
compared with peers in concentrated poverty schools.
Diverse schools also show higher graduation rate across
Russia and economic groups.
The second one
or the second benefit, uh, uh,
studies in the educational research shows that interacting
with peers from diverse backgrounds
encourages deeper thinking
and problem solving approaches with students more likely
to consider alternative
and evaluate their evidence from multiple viewpoints.
On the third benefit here, research indicates
that cross race friendship in diverse schools predict
more positive attitudes towards racial, ethnic,
ethnic groups over time
and reduce significant sign significantly implicit bias.
Uh, the fourth one.
Uh, with the fourth point, I would say
that research synthesizing K 12
and longitudinal outcomes finds that
students from diverse schools are more likely
to choose diverse colleges careers
and living environments later
and living environments later in life.
And finally, the fifth one,
diverse environments can help students feel more accepted,
valued, and secure, reducing feeling of isolation
and marginalization.
Okay,
Uh, good evening.
Um, I'm Nikki Remson.
I am the assistant principal of skilling.
Um, not only am I administrator in the district,
I'm also a parent having a child in the middle school
and another one in the high school.
Um, so, uh, as a leadership team, we had to consider, um,
all the options ahead.
Um, some of which represent significant change, um, for all
of the stakeholders, we have been aware
of class sizes across the district.
So in this slide,
you can see the current average class size for each of our schools.
In parentheses, uh, you will see the number
of sections at each grade level as well.
So that means how many classrooms, uh, per,
uh, each grade level.
So it says times two. It's two classrooms times four, um,
four classrooms, and so on.
Um, in this slide here, it talks about, um, the
guidelines for the board for class size.
All the proposal we have considered, um,
are within these guidelines that are here
that the board decided on.
Thanks.
Good evening. My name is Ellen Feric
and I'm the Director of Curriculum Instruction
and assessment for the district.
In a district this size, one challenge is ensuring
that the education that all students receive does not depend
upon which school one attends.
Over the past five years, we have made efforts
to help ensure that all students receive a common curriculum
across the five elementary schools.
These include the adoption of Into Math in the fall of 2025,
the addition of common literacy programs across all five
schools that reflect science of reading
and the integration of science
and social studies instruction
with common interdisciplinary units.
Even with these improvements, adding greater ability
for teachers to collaborate and share
and support one another will move our outcomes along.
Students benefit when teachers have ample opportunity
to share practices, look at student work together,
and embed professional growth within their school day.
In analyzing the proposals we present to you this evening,
we have weighed the potential to allow
for greater teacher collaboration within a grade
level across the district.
I'm Mandy Wallace, tech Director for the schools.
As we considered the options in front
of the board this evening, we see some benefits in the area
of technology and professional learning.
In the event of a grade configuration,
professional learning will be more efficient
as great specific PD will require less travel,
and we'll have a greater
aggregation of teachers at those schools.
Andy, can you change the slide?
Oh, sorry. Thanks. Yes, I can. Thank you.
Ironically, um, supportive devices will also be easier
'cause we currently have iPads at some levels,
and we have Chromebooks at other levels.
If there's a grade level reconfiguration,
each school will have just one device type.
If we do close the school,
we'll recoup spare interactive panels, audio systems,
telephones, cameras, networking equipment,
and wifi access points.
So we can deploy them to accommodate potentially
larger class sizes.
And as teachers move from one school to the other,
we already have the exact same configuration
of technology in each classroom.
So that change will be mitigated in that respect.
I also wanna acknowledge that there are a number
of questions about technology in the, uh,
public questions area,
and we'll be addressing those at future, um, board meetings.
Good evening. I'm Mike Nally,
director of Operations and Safety.
As we develop the multiple options for cost saving measures,
we're careful to consider the operational
and maintenance costs associated with these plans.
On this slide, you'll see the various factors.
We are also considering,
We also modeled out our projected maintenance costs
for the five elementary schools for the next five years.
The majority of these costs are routine preventative
maintenance projects that will inva inva invariably occur on
any building to help maintain the facility
and extend the service life.
Examples of such work include ongoing roofing, maintenance,
painting, and window replacements.
However, skilling will require an HVAC system replacement in
the relatively near future with an estimated cost
of approximately $3 million for additional consideration.
Skill and dire are scheduled
to install Secure vestibules this summer
with work beginning at Skill and shortly after April break.
Thank you.
Good evening, everyone.
I'm Abigail Chen, director of Finance and HR Operations.
Um, We are a school district, right?
So this is all about education.
And I, as your finance director, am here
to support the educational mission.
Um, it's very important to me that we, um,
that the budget supports education
versus the other way around.
Um, and I, I do want to make clear that that's, um,
where this is all coming from, um, to the board members.
Um, we've been making new updates
and calculations up to the last minute.
So we'll be reprinting some
of the items that you have printed.
Um, but what we have now is, is even more accurate.
So we'll be presenting nine scenarios.
Um, and what we are presenting is our preliminary estimates
to provide the initial ideas, um, for
how the different elementary options may bear out.
Um, and that's financially, that's in terms of FTEs lost,
and that's in terms of educational impact,
including any positive impact wherever that may be found.
Um, financially, all nine scenarios were evaluated, um,
not just for this coming year.
Um, I imagine many of us feel that we have
to consider more than one year in our thinking
and our decision making.
Um, in that, in, in that light, we've included, um,
the capital, uh, projects
that were projected in the next five fiscal years.
Uh, oops. Now I want to get into the matrix.
Let's see. Okay. Okay.
Okay. So that's a,
I wanna see if I can make that a little bigger.
Okay. Um, can everyone see that? Okay? Okay.
No, no, but that's all right. Well, how can we make this
Mm-hmm.
This one right here?
Yeah. In the front.
Okay.
I think that's better. Okay.
Okay. So this is all online, so you can also follow along.
Um, but what you're looking at is, um,
the financial overview of all of the models.
So you can see 1.1, 1.2, and so on to 1.9.
That's our nine models.
These are worked out both financially,
but we're starting off with the FTEs
and type of FTEs that would be reduced in each version.
So, in the SPTA, you can see
this is column C-S-P-A-A and so on.
Um, what I, what I am compelled to make clear here, um, is
that as we're looking at the elementary options, the FTEs
that would be reduced, um,
this is really part of a whole budget.
And if you recall a few slides ago, there's a low
and a high version of
how the elementary reductions may affect
the district as a whole.
So what that means is, if, for example, if we were
to move forward with, you know, the lowest
FTE reduction here, um,
that does not fundamentally change the number of FTEs
that may be reduced overall.
Okay? The next piece of this is
that the FTE reductions,
that you're looking at those numbers, 17.5, 22.5, and so on.
Um, the way reductions happen in,
in practical terms, um, is that seniority is a,
is a major consideration, right?
So you can't necessarily think, okay, that's 17.5
elementary school, um, teacher human beings, right?
It's 17.5, uh, teachers as a whole from the district,
unless something changes that
makes that work out differently.
Um, so just, we have to keep those things in mind when we're
thinking of those particular numbers.
Um, and again, this is a piece of the puzzle.
Um, you can see, if you scroll over, you can see S-P-T-A-S,
P-A-A-S-P-S-P-A-S-C-A, um, the central staff is,
are not included here.
Other reductions are not included here.
Um, but all in all areas will have impact, okay?
All areas will have impact.
Um, and furthermore, choosing a, you know,
a higher FTE option here is not going to, um, you know,
save central jobs.
Okay? This is a, a big enough problem that all areas, um,
will, will experience impact, including central staff.
Okay? Um, so if you are, you can see the numbers here
of FTEs, that would be reduced.
We have column K that is the savings
that we're estimating in this year, FY 27, the year at hand,
we have, um, an estimate estimated values
for the facilities savings.
So these are only if the respective school closes in
that particular, um, scenario.
So, for example, in scenario 1.3,
close either Kaler
or Dyer reconfigure the remaining elementary schools we're
estimating we would save about 365,000 in just the
facilities costs of maintaining the building.
Then we have our five year look ahead
to the Capital Pro projects
that we are anticipating in the next five fiscal years.
Um, as you can see, um,
there's a pretty staggering difference between whether skill
and is closed versus whether any other school is closed.
Um, and that's due to the, the major hvac, um, renovations
that would have to happen to keep that school, um,
running as it should.
Then in all scenarios, um, except 1.2,
which is doing nothing, um, we have moving costs.
Trans, you know, not all scenarios are just
purely reductions.
There are costs associated with moving people around, um,
with moving furniture, with moving everything.
Um, and then in addition, some scenarios have,
um, some space needs as a result of reconfiguration
and where those are happening, we would anticipate, um,
either purchasing or leasing portables.
And so we have estimated costs for those, in those options.
Okay? Then we have a total amount saved
for this coming up fiscal year.
And then when we include, you know, all the capital projects
that we anticipate for a given building, um, we have
a five year estimated savings, um,
in the next five fiscal years.
So that's that piece of it.
So that's the financial and FTE reduction piece.
The next, um, place I want to go is this matrix.
So this matrix includes, um,
both the financial considerations that I just mentioned, um,
but also the other edu other educational pieces.
Um, so you can see here, um, how our administrators,
our principals, assistant principals, directors, um,
they really thought through, um, various educational impacts
such as instructional coherence, opportunities
for grade level collaboration and so on.
Um, they were scored, um, from zero to three,
zero being just not at all, um, one being very low,
um, low improve, low positive improvement,
and three being a very high positive
improvement in this area.
Okay. So for example, opportunities
for grade level collaboration, zero meaning nothing new,
one being a low impact on increasing those opportunities.
Three being, um, you know, this scenario would, um,
be a very high positive improvement in
that particular metric.
So, again, you can see we really considered a lot
of different areas, um, improving,
um, excuse me.
Um, we also considered family changes.
Um, I think that's a, that's one that's close
to everybody's heart.
Um, this is a bit of an inverse one where, um, three, um,
or three would be, you know, very little change.
Uh, one being, um, a lot of change.
We have additional scoring
for the fiscal long-term effects versus the year one
effects, um, that's particularly noticeable with skill in.
And all of that went into, um, a total score.
Um, as you can see here in column C, um, at this point,
you can see that there are a few scenarios
that do stand out.
Um, and in this next tab, I wanna show you just another view
of how to look at this.
Okay. I think we can get a little bit bigger. Okay.
So what I'm presenting now is, is a, is a combination
of the first two tables.
Um, so you can see versions one through nine.
Um, at this point they have, uh, kinda a clearer name.
So option 1.1, we, uh, just reconfigure all the schools.
Um, and you can see what it does
to Brown dire Taylor skill and, and small.
Um, there would be no capacity issues with that option,
no portables, um, no other concerns.
And you can see the total five year, uh, savings
that we would anticipate based on our initial preliminary
modeling, um,
in 1.2 reductions at every school to achieve savings.
Um, this is the, um, kind of no change version of things.
Um, but you have to imagine that just purely making cuts
with no particular goal in mind other than just
to fit the budget.
Um, there would be inherent reconfiguring just, um,
incidentally, um, due to just simply having fewer staff.
Um, um, 1.3.
Um, the third scenario is to close either Dyer or Kaler.
Um, those two were combined
because they're pretty similar financially.
Um, and in terms of the types of space, number of classrooms
that they have in this option, um,
it had a pretty high score overall.
It had one of the highest scores for, um, education, um,
per the principals and directors.
Um, it, it had a high financial score.
Um, this one, again would close, um, either Dyer or Kaler
and reconfigure the rest.
Um, some capacity issues not,
but not very much, and no portables.
The fourth scenario, again,
it's closing either Dyer or Kaler.
And instead of reconfiguring,
just reshuffling all the students in that school
to the other schools, um, in that option, um,
you can see capacity, capacity issues are,
are higher in that option.
Um, so there would definitely be redistricting there.
You can see the total year through five.
Um, it doesn't score as well.
Um, on the education piece, um, I think due
to all the benefits of reconfiguration
that you just heard from several people already,
the fifth scenario is to close brown
and then reconfigure the rest.
Um, uh, we anticipate low capacity issues, um,
about 15 to 16 million in savings over five years.
Um, that one also got a higher score on the, the
positive impacts for education.
The sixth scenario, um, is to close small
and reconfigure the rest.
Um, similar financially, um, low, um,
low capacity issues a little bit.
Um, some office space issues.
Um, the seventh scenario is
to disclose skill in and reconfigure.
Um, and then seven, eight,
and nine closing skill in is financially, uh,
vastly much different than the others.
Um, this one, 1.7, um, had both
a high score educationally for the,
the positive impacts there.
Um, it was also one of the strongest, uh, financial impacts.
Um, there are capacity issues with that scenario.
Um, and you then we would need to have, uh,
some portables, um, to make that work.
The eighth scenario, closing skill and,
and keeping the others or having everybody else
at pre-K through four.
Um, it does, it scores lower on education.
It still has a high financial impact.
Um, and there's definitely capacity issues with that
scenario and redistricting as well.
And then finally, our ninth scenario, um, is
to close skill in, keep all the other schools at K
through four, and then build out, um,
a separated wing in the high school for pre-K.
So then all the pre-K students are in one location, um,
in a wing of the high school skill is closed in the rest.
This one, again, scored lower on education, um,
with the pre-K and K through four, it's separate locations.
It doesn't have the same, uh, benefits.
And as you can see, we've circled kind of our top three.
Um, and what we feel is these are, these are the options
that are surfacing through our analysis as having both,
um, the best possible education outcomes given our situation
as a whole, and also, um, strong financial returns for,
uh, the next few years.
Thank you.
I am Johanna Prince. I'm the assistant superintendent
of schools and wanna thank the team
that has been hard at work.
Uh, I, I hope you can tell this evening that we have tried
to think about as many possible solutions
to the issue that we have, recognizing that, that all
of them means significant change for the school community
and for the families of our community.
And we appreciate, um, the huge undertaking
that we have together.
Um, as Abigail shared,
as the leadership team emerged from our analysis,
the three plans,
and we have ranked them for the board in terms of those
that, again, holds the most potential for
the district, um, is first plan 1.7,
which would be a closure at skilling,
and then having dire
and Kaler house our pre-K through one students, while Brown
and Small would, um, host our grades two through four R
in option 1.3.
There's also a closure.
This, it is indicated as Kaler here, uh,
as Abigail shared.
Kaler and Dyer have a very similar footprint.
So we may wanna do some more in-depth analysis, uh, in terms
of, um, if one of those emerges as more beneficial.
Here, it's indicated as Kaler in this model, small
and dire would host pre-K through one and Skill,
and Brown would host grades through two, two through four
in option 1.8.
Again, it is a closure of skilling, which means, uh,
our largest group of students would have to travel, uh,
to other schools in this model.
However, all schools would become pre-K
through four schools.
We anticipate six classrooms of pre-K next year.
And so each of the elementary schools in this model would
have at least one classroom.
Dr. Entwistle, before we begin questions, are there any
last words that you want to share before the board begins?
Questions,
I, I, I, I think, um, I'm, I'm, I'm speaking about
what is already obvious probably to all of you.
Uh, there's been incredible efforts, um, made, uh, by,
uh, Johanna
and, uh, uh, by Abigail, certainly by the team.
Um, overall, this has been a very,
very structured, uh, very in depth look, um, at,
uh, problem solving.
And, uh, I think they've done a fabulous job.
I am completely, uh, supportive of making a choice
of one of these three options,
and I have a high level of confidence, um,
that if we go any other direction, uh, we are, we are
going to be in some ways kicking some part of the,
the problem down the road.
So I'm gonna take questions now. If you're ready.
Uh, if they're board members who have questions,
if you would just raise your hand
so I can get people in order.
And, uh, we'll keep Joe up at the podium
for asking questions along, uh,
answers along with Abigail's.
So, uh, Daniel, uh, member feller,
Ready to go? Yeah.
Alright. Okay.
So start with one question that, that, yes.
We'll, we'll just sort of keep moving. Thank you.
Okay. So I've talked to, I would say between 50
and 60 parents
and teachers, I think of those 54 came out in support
of grade level reconfiguration.
And I can see here in this matrix
of rating why grade level reconfiguration might be good
for students that you're saying it's improving instructional
coherence, it's improving opportunities
for grade level collaboration, improving coordination
of special education, and improving equity.
However, it does not seem self-evident
that grade school reconfiguration improves diversity.
I haven't seen any stats on that
or improves academic achievement.
And in fact, I've seen some published literature that says
reconfiguration, uh, is disruptive to kids
and harms academic achievement.
So can you just in a succinct way, make the case
for elementary school grade level reconfiguration?
So give that to you, Dr. Prince.
Sure. I, I think the team spoke about reconfiguration.
Right now, our five schools are not representative
of our student body.
We know that when students are in school with diverse peers,
and the way that we get to diverse peers in this district is
through reconfiguration
because of the distribution of our housing across this city.
Any system that we use that is based on your address alone
will replicate those structural inequities.
And so any choice we have to
build in equitable access through reconfiguration
is indeed what we believe to be best.
And I think the team
before me spoke about, um, the research that's behind that.
Um, and again, the fact that
we have huge differences from 6% in one school
to 33% of students being multilingual.
So hopefully that helps.
Um, but I also understand,
and it makes perfect sense to me, that that is the,
uh, that is the challenge that families will face.
They have to think about two different drop off locations,
two different PTAs.
We do appreciate that.
Um, and that is part of it,
and that is why not all
of the models include reconfiguration.
We too have gotten those emails from members
of the public teachers parents.
And so we have tried to bring you options
that do not just include reconfiguration.
If you recall, in December when we met,
that was where we were.
We, it was one option of reconfiguration.
We now have tried to look at this nine different ways
to say, we have to find the best possible solution.
And again, we're going to share our opinion,
but you as the board
and informed by your constituents, um, you know, will,
will help us make that choice.
Thanks.
Thank you. Uh, member Richardson.
Um, so these kind of go together,
but, um, nowhere unfortunately in the presentation is the
difference in academic outcomes
amongst the elementary schools.
That just seems like such a, an obvious void.
Um, and, and I think there's a story
that needs to be told there.
And I don't know why it's ex being excluded here tonight.
Um, I attended almost every single boundaries
and configuration meeting as a parent.
This was before I was on the board.
It's actually one of the reasons I ran for school board.
Um, and this board approved several
proposals by that steering committee.
And this board never did anything with those proposals.
So we're here tonight talking about an issue,
an equity issue
that has already been raised in this district
and that this board has given directions to,
uh, to pursue.
So, and at that time,
fiscal savings was never presented as part of
that discussion under the boundaries and configuration.
I can't deny that the numbers are right.
I, I mean, Abigail, I trust you wholeheartedly in the,
in all in your, in what you've done there.
But this is a bit of a bait
and switch for this community, um, in that
it feels like we haven't done the work
that we said we were going to do,
and now we're in a really difficult situation where we have
to find savings.
And unfortunately, the option, not, not
that I'm a proponent of no change,
but it's really unfortunate
that we can't even see monetarily what no change
to the restructure
of our schools does from a discount savings,
because there will be these alleged reductions in staff.
But what, what would that amount be?
I mean, that's a really, that's a tough,
that's a tough proposal to not have any financial
outcomes for.
So, um,
so I guess I have a question about that.
Why we, why we can't spec that out?
And then also, why are we not talking
about academic outcomes?
'cause I think to Daniel's point, um, that's part of
what the overall goal I would think would be was, you know,
is, is, is is better academic outcomes.
So, so what are the academic outcomes now?
Where, how are we falling down on our students and,
and how is reconfiguration going to solve
for those academic outcomes?
Understanding that we now only just it seems,
has have implemented elementary school-wide curriculum for,
I'm, I'm hearing as of 2025,
we finally are all teaching the same math curriculum
for our, for our elementary students. If I misheard that,
Sure. There's
a number of things that I would love
to point out there.
No, the district has for a long standing amount of time,
used the same curriculum in math.
We changed what that curriculum was in the fall of 2025,
and we've done significant professional development on that.
Prior to that, we used investigations.
So over the last four years while I have been here
and preceding me, we have made significant improvements in
consistent curriculum
and expectations across the four schools,
the outcomes across the district.
And we did not choose to duplicate
and reshow the work that was done before.
We are building on the work
of boundaries and configurations.
Certainly we can pull it into this analysis,
but without a doubt they match
the disparity in the profiles of our school.
And so this is an effort to
have increased academic outcomes across the district.
So, um, we do not have the same level of achievement,
and we certainly can bring that back to the board.
Um, so I'm sorry. It feels like a bait and switch for me.
It is the next step in a conversation
that we started two years ago,
and you are correct, we haven't taken the next step
and now we have another demand
that gives us the opportunity to make that choice.
Um, and so a apologies
that it feels like a bait and switch for me.
It is. Getting back to that question with regards
to option two, i, I think it's really important to not think
of option 1.2 as no change.
Option two would be at least $2 million of savings
via applying a percentage reduction to all of our schools.
What that would mean is that of the $2 million,
if skill has 30% of our students
skill would be responsible for 30% of that reduction,
it would mean a massive disruption
and disservice to our students
who are furthest from opportunity.
The board has made a commitment that we've lived by
that skill, and Kayla have smaller class sizes,
and we have increasingly resourced those two buildings
because of that commitment that came out
of boundaries and configurations.
If we take option 1.2 that will reverse all of that,
we will have to take all those additional supports out,
meaning that our students will face increasing inequity.
So, no, we didn't model it
because how each building achieves that efficiency
would take more careful analysis.
Uh, but it would be at least $2 million in savings, um,
if we were to take that option.
Thank you Dr. Prince. Uh, um, member Smith.
Um, so I, I have a, uh, a couple comments
and then a question specifically about enrollment projection
and the, um, the incoming pre-K programming.
So my first comment, I think to the board would be
to look at the options of closing skill in,
which makes a lot of sense financially.
Um, and I think it offers that one opportunity
to not reconfigure.
Um, I just want to recognize the fact that
if we close skilling, it's gonna mean making the majority
of our black and brown
and poor students travel across the, the, uh, the district.
Right? And if you look at who's out here in the room right
now, right at who's here
to talk about this here, to put political pressure on us
to make decisions, right?
It's not those kids. And so, I'm sorry.
Yeah, Historically,
take your time. I'm sorry.
That's okay. Take your time.
I think when you look historically at this country,
it's very easy politically to make decisions
that involves busing black and brown kids.
And it's very difficult to bus kids
that are white and that are rich.
And you see it everywhere across America.
Decisions to desegregate fell apart when it
meant busting white kids.
And I think we should look at this as desegregation, right?
I don't think we should look at this.
Um, I, I think it's really important
that we think about this as an opportunity
to desegregate our schools.
And when we talk about desegregation in the civil rights
era, it sounds like a bygone, uh, issue that,
but in reality it's one that we never solved.
And so I just want the board to, to recognize that
as an issue, um, to consider.
Um, my other question is about, uh, pre-K programs.
So I know we've talked, um, about this incoming, um, group
of students, uh, about 80 to 90 in the fourth, uh,
four year olds, and then 80 to 90 again of three year olds.
My question for the district is, I know we've talked,
it's possible that we wouldn't be
housing all of these students.
Um, and so I just wanted to hear if there was any, um, kind
of movement on, uh, a more concrete plan of what
that's gonna look like as we think about capacity.
Um, and then relatedly, um,
as we talk about kind of the portables and construction, um,
and the capacity issues, um, I wanted to get a sense
of we had done any kind of enrollment projections.
'cause I know as enrollment declines, we're gonna continue
to see declined enrollment.
I don't know how much pre-K is gonna make
up for that in the short term.
Um, but just wanted to hear some kind of general,
um, thoughts about that. Thank you.
Sure. Uh, so the, the future analysis
that we have is that our class sizes, um,
are an individual grade band will continue to have about 200
to 220 students.
Um, some of them are even following below 200 now.
Um, as we think about pre-K, um,
my colleague spoke about the fact
that currently this year we offer 64 seats
in-house for pre-K.
We have 16 seats offsite through Chickadee as a partner.
Uh, next year, our hope would be that we take that number up
to 128 available seats
with six classrooms in the district.
One of those in partnership with Head Start
and two offsite programs continuing the one program
that we've had, and then expanding
to the United Way programming.
So about 128 seats would be our goal for next year.
Um, we do anticipate that even if we were
to make available 200 seats for four year olds,
there are families that will not make the choice
to have their child's in 4-year-old programming, um,
because of an attachment to an existing childcare provider,
or their child is at home with a caregiver.
So again, we, we don't anticipate that we need to get
to the full 200 seats to meet community demand.
In terms of the provision of special education services
for next year.
We will be responsible for coordinating the CDS services
for the four year olds, again,
in the following year when we will take on the provision
of services for three year olds, we do not necessarily
foresee that those students are coming into our buildings,
but rather that we will be needing
to coordinate things like speech and OT
and some of those related service, uh, related services
that Sonya Croft talked about.
Thank you. Uh, member Holman.
Um, oh, one thing I wanted to say is, uh,
board member Tyler Smith.
I love what you said that, that
that's a courageous statement,
and it's a very true statement.
And, uh, um, uh, none, you know, the, the only some
of our students ever get to walk to school.
A lot of 'em are bust.
And particularly if you look, can we look at that map again?
Sure. And I apologize, the quality is not great up there,
but, um, I won't go back.
So, I mean, if you go over to, uh, you know,
where 2 95 is, is there anyone who's, who walks that we,
I mean, is that part of the plan
or are students all provided with busing?
Everybody on the other side of 2 95, all busing?
They're, they're a hundred percent provided with busing.
Yep. You know, so, I mean, uh, yeah, what, what he said,
what he said, you know, it's very important for us
to think about and, uh, you know,
it's an unfortunate reality
that we've developed our world this way, you know,
that we could have, we could have,
we had other choices we could have
made along all the way along.
So, you know, uh, and, uh, I think, uh, that I, uh, uh,
yeah, I, I'm, I like that.
And then, um, I just wanna clarify a question about pre-K.
Sure. We're offering pre-K because we want to, right?
We're not forced to by the state.
Um, it is not yet an expectation,
but what we do know about investments, uh, is all
of the research suggests
that every dollar you spend in early intervention is
$7 saved later.
We know that the sooner that we can intervene for students,
um, and provide them supports to, uh, to gain skills
and confidence in various areas, um,
does have long-term benefits in our, in our programming
and society.
So, um, it's a strategic choice as well. Can
We go back to the slide that, um, which is,
which is the one that I wanna see?
Um, uh,
Can you tell me the number?
Yeah, hold on. Um,
let me tell, tell me, tell my brain first.
Sure. Okay.
Um, uh, go back to the one with the three yellow columns.
Um, I guess what, what slide numbers? That's, uh, um,
This one. Options
Of matrix combined. Yeah.
Yep. So, uh, so, um,
Uh, I do think that, um, I thought it was of interest what,
what was, what was said about skill.
And I think that it,
it makes a point about the particular role that skill has.
Uh, um, Tyler Smith made an important point about
how the role skill has, so I think that
that's really something to consider,
even though there's more money to be saved,
but, um, maybe there's something important
to be saved there too.
Um, another thing to notice is,
Kay is in the environmentally worst position of the schools.
So that's something, you know, the tanks are there,
there's something that one
might wanna take into consideration.
Um, and that's, I can't think
of my other question right now.
I had one, but it has a escape. Oh, yeah.
Um, uh, about, um, about, uh, school changes.
Um, what I've seen in some of the research is
that what's really harmful is when
you get bumped around a lot.
As a kid, you don't have a cohort.
You're, you're the new kid in school
again and again and again.
I think that's different from changing
schools, um, with your cohort.
Of course, there are some, there are some young people,
some people in life who find it is not,
transitions are always hard for them no matter how frequent.
But, um, anyway,
I just feel like we are not talking about kids
being bumped around all the time.
So I think that's a difference.
And if some of the studies that, uh, even were sent,
if you look at them, they were about, for example,
what happens if a rural school closes?
Yes. That damages the community very much.
We don't have a situation where any one
of our schools is the, is the center of our community.
Not like, you know, Fayette School or something like that.
Anyone know Fayette?
Uh, one thing I know Fayette, I would like
to point out on, um, member Holman's.
Uh, point is that just, uh, as we talked about pre-K,
I think it's important to realize that a large number
of our pre-K students already make for transitions,
because pre-K doesn't exist at every single one
of our buildings, but pre-K students from across
the district are eligible.
So if a skill
and child goes to pre-K, they attend at either Dyer
or Kaler, then they make a transition to K through four,
then five through eight, then nine through 12.
So again, we do currently have the process
or the, the possibility that a child could have
that many transitions in their academic year.
Again, it's not all children
that experience that transition, though.
Thank you. Uh, member Dowling.
Thank you. And, uh, thank you Dr. Prince
and other members of the, uh, executive team
for all the work you've been doing, uh, on this.
Uh, could we go back to slide number 14?
Was that the map you wanted? Yes.
Yep. Yes. Thank you. Um, so just as a, as a quick way
of getting my bearings, do you happen to know, um,
how current or, or not current this,
or maybe the better question is, like when this,
this map was created, how long ago or how recently?
Uh, this, for those of you that participated in boundaries
and configurations, you'll recognize it from those meetings.
So that was two years ago.
I don't know the actual date of the map,
but if there's something that you feel has changed,
we certainly could look into that.
Right. So one of the reasons why I bring it up is there,
um, there's a very large apartment complex
that was built in my district, um,
like back when I was on the city council,
so a lot of years ago.
And it's, it's not, it, it's shown as outside of the,
the Pink Boundaries.
So I'm wondering, do the people that live in the, in
that building, do they go to Skill in, are they grouped
with the Brick Hill kids and Bus to Brown? Or
Is it the development that's sort
of over towards the main mall
Clark's Pond? Yeah.
Yep. I believe Clark's Pond is skilling. Okay.
So, um, and Apologies that
that line isn't show there. No,
No worries. Um,
a related question to that is, uh, as,
as you've been in, in this kind of, uh, first phase
of the budget development process,
and when I say you, I don't mean just you,
but anyone, um, have there been any,
I wonder if there's been any sort of like cross uh,
discussions with maybe like the city planning department
to get ideas like maybe they know there's, you know,
a housing development with 200 units
that might be on the horizon to kind
of give the school department a heads up about where
that would be and
Sure. Uh, last
week Mike Nally was meeting with, um, uh,
the city planning department.
Um, at, at this point we didn't have any evidence
to bring tonight that would greatly impact these options,
but certainly that's something that
as we get information we could adjust.
I think what, um,
what we have found in the last few weeks is
that every time you think you come up with a configuration,
you realize there's another option
or another way to look at it.
Um, and again, we,
we didn't want nine already felt to overwhelming.
Um, we, we wanted to bring some forward to you all
to help guide us so that again,
next week we can bring a complete picture
of the budget forward with, with some idea
of the ideas, knowing that any plan we choose is going
to need a, a lot more refinement to it.
Um, but that's certainly an important one to consider.
Okay. And I, I just want to ask the chair question.
Um, I have a skill and related question,
but I'm happy to hold
and let someone else go, go ahead if that's better.
No, go ahead. Okay. Um, so I,
some people may know I,
I chair the school department's buildings
and grounds committee, and one of the frequent topics we,
we discussed that committee is heating and cooling
and facilities condition and, and all that sort of stuff.
Um, and several months ago at, at one of the meetings,
um, Mr.
Blaney and I did speak a little bit about the,
the boiler at, at Skillman.
And, uh, I recall, I recall asking him, like, I've,
I've heard that that's, you know, an old boiler.
How much, how much time do you think we have
left on that boiler?
And what he said, uh,
and I don't know if he's in the audience or not,
but, uh, he said, you know, it's,
it's not an efficient boiler by today's standards
because today's boilers are condensing boilers,
and this is a non-condensing boiler.
So it's like 82% efficient instead of 90% efficient.
But his opinion, having worked on it a lot, was
that he felt it still had another, like 10 years.
He said, you know, this is really like robust.
Like, they don't build 'em like they used to kind of thing.
So, um, I'm, I'm wondering, has something happened recently
that is now putting that front
and center as like, not only is it, you know,
not gonna last very long, but it's, you know, it's,
it's like on its last legs.
Because as of six months ago, that wasn't what,
what my understanding was.
Sure. And I'm gonna call on Mike Nally if he'd like
to come up to take that question for us.
Yeah. Thanks for the question. And I certainly, um,
if I was in the room with you
and Harold when you spoke of it, I don't recall
that conversation, but I, I trust that's what he told you.
I think you were handling a,
a school bus issue at the time
That that sounds right.
Um, I think the, the, the, the challenge with
that system is it's, it's very old.
It's very antiquated. It is built like a tank.
The parts are all obsolete,
and being able to continue
to service it is gonna become very expensive very quickly.
And we're, we're one failure away from
that system going down hard.
And then we're gonna be put in a position where we have to,
where we have to make the change
because it won't be cost effective to,
to change out those components because they're obsolete.
So I can't, we, we, you know, got through this winter,
I think, um, and we could probably get
through next winter, I think.
But that is the, that's the system that keeps me,
that gives me anxiety at night
because we don't know exactly when it's going down.
I think 10 years is, um, I'll circle back with you on that.
I'm not sure where that number came from.
Um, that was understanding. I'm not holding to
that understanding, talking to the, the technicians
who built the estimate for it.
Okay. Does that, does that answer your
Question? It does. Thank you, Mr. Natalie.
Okay, thanks.
If you'll just wait, I wanna go, I want, I wanna go first
to, um, member Rich and to the students.
Uh, um, member Kabisa, you had a question?
Yeah, go ahead. Oh,
Okay. Um,
I just had a question on how, like we plan
to support students and their families when it comes
to like stab like stability, um, especially children
with like IEPs, multilingual students
and special ed students.
'cause that might seem like a, I guess a small issue.
'cause I know they, you guys said that they will be moving
four schools at the end of the day,
but like, I don't know, like
as a formal multilingual student myself,
like when you're leaving, eventually you,
you leave your EL classes
and you still wanna have that connection
with your EL teacher
and be like, oh, this is what I'm doing in my English class.
Like, oh, this is very hard for me,
but you have someone to like talk to.
And I feel like, especially like elementary schoolers going
from first grade to second grade
and say, you leave your EO classes at that age,
you're still trying to integrate into that community.
And that could be very hard,
especially if you don't have the teacher
who helped you integrate into that community.
So it's like, how are we going to, you know,
obviously this situation is inevitable,
but how are we going to plan to support those students
and their families, basically.
Thank you. Go ahead.
It's a terrific question.
And again, this process and reading, uh, parent
and community questions makes me so incredibly proud
of the work that we do in South Portland
and the ways that parents feel
and kids feel connected to our schools.
And I think it's a testament to our educators, um,
and to the folks that work in our schools around
how we build relationships with kids.
Um, and I would hope that we will take
that exact same energy for how we have welcomed kids
in our current configurations into whatever
configuration we, we will.
I also think that it's, um, a little bit to
what her gildo spoke about in his slide, in that
by giving all kids access to a cohort
of peers so
that they are not the only multilingual kid in third grade,
but they might be one of a group of,
they are not only building those
positive adult relationships,
but they also can be building those peer
to peer relationships that are critical for students.
So I do think that ability to increase belonging
between our kids as we, uh, create greater diversity
in our schools, um, is another support that we would offer.
Um, and then, you know, I think it will, it will take all
of us, you know, Dr.
Stern spoke about some of the lessons
that they learned in merging schools
and making that change for the middle school.
I would be eager to have her speak
and to have her teacher leaders speak with, uh, those
for the elementary school if we move in that direction
to think about how have they found ways in a very large
school to create teams
and have kids feel known by a group of adults
and feel like they belong.
So I, I think they're excellent questions
that I feel like we're prepared to answer
based on whatever plan, um, we move forward with.
Thank you. Member Davidson.
Uh, yes. Hi everyone.
Uh, my question is, how will transportation expenses
increase with reconfiguration
and how does this figure compare
to the estimated cost savings proposed
through school closures and changes?
Great question. Um, in the,
excuse me one second while I get there.
Um, in the column
o of this, um, we definitely know with some
of these plans, they take more comprehensive reexamination
of our transportation routes.
Um, and so have budgeted for transportation consultancy,
um, to make sure that we are making those changes.
Um, not just potentially minor adjustments to a route,
but some of those might be complete redesign of the roots.
So we do anticipate with any of the plans
that have students moving between buildings, which is most
of them that we would engage,
and we have quotes from those consultants to, to try
and mitigate those costs.
As I've shared, I think in prior board meetings,
we currently run five school schedules.
Our buses cross the city over
and over again throughout the day.
Um, so we do feel we are prepared to meet those
and we anticipate that there is a cost of, uh, working
with a consultant for that planning,
but the actual cost, um, of change in transportation routes
or driver hours, we don't anticipate being, uh,
a significant, um, cost.
Thank you. Uh, member Rich, do you have some questions?
I'd like to share with you some, uh,
feedback I got from some of my constituents,
and it mostly revolves around accountability.
I believe accountability is planning
and saying this is what's gonna happen,
and then maybe checking later on what did happen.
Can you help me with that on this plan?
I know it's early, but, uh,
it just seems like I've gotten this feeling from the
community that this is a, a guess.
I, I'm sorry, I'm not sure what the question is here.
I think we've provided you nine models.
Maybe it's a little early, but it feels like we just need
to follow through with more planning.
So maybe that's where we're at, right? Not planned out yet.
Well, I, I think we know that in order
to meet the budgetary constraints that have been set out
Yep. Which is about
seven something, right. Closer
To eight, uh, closer to 8 million mm-hmm.
Um, we have to make changes. Correct.
So I, I think as Chair DeAngelo said at the beginning,
the the question is not if we're making changes, right?
It's how we're making changes. That's
What I'm underlying how, yeah.
So again, our hope is
to get some indication from the board as to
is there, um, are there some of these models
that there are directions feel most promising?
Um, so that, again, we can further refine them.
Certainly these are not complete.
Um, but hopefully they show you the scope of considerations.
Okay. Thank you.
So we, we've gone one round except for me,
so I wanna go a second round if there
are questions. Member Holman.
Um, I, I just wanted to underscore also, um, what, um,
member, um, Eleni Richardson said earlier
about the academic side.
And, um, I do think that it would be good to see the,
to have that information.
I thought that was a good point.
And uh, it is, we do wonder where, you know,
that would be good to have in there.
Other questions? Uh, member Richardson.
Um, I think I, I think to kind of piggyback off
of member Richard's comment, I think, I think it's a really,
I think, I think we all know we have to make sacrifices.
I think it's just unfortunate we had to start
With the sacrifice that impacts our youngest population
of students, um,
because there is a tremendous amount accountability
that needs to happen with our district,
given the financial situation
that we're in, which is a mess.
Um, and I know that we're foreshadowing cuts,
you know, it with the 12 other, you know, and,
and it's the not knowing of what we're, what that is.
That, that, that makes it really hard to kind
of isolate this conversation
because right now it just feels like we're just, you know,
we, we have surprised the community with the deficit.
We have a third year of a deficit.
And I only just learned that as a board member.
You know, when I joined the finance committee and we started
and we had Abigail digging into the bowels of our,
of our books and records, doing everything that she should,
but revealing issues over and over and over again.
And, and now we're asking for more from the community.
And so it's just a really unfortunate situation
that we are in as a board.
Um, there are equity issues with the way
that our elementary schools are, are configured,
and I wanna bring this community along in that discussion.
I don't wanna ram a change down their throat.
And we're, we've, we have to do that now.
And the June referendum will be treated
as a referendum against reconfiguration.
And the impact of a no vote means we're back here
doing this discussion.
So we can't ignore the negative feedback we're hearing about
a massive community disruption.
So while, I mean, so I, I encourage our board
to consider the impact of whatever decision we make.
Can it be a phased approach?
Can it be something that, again,
is bringing this community along, um, on a change that,
um, that has the, the appetite to be extremely significant?
So in the area of transparency,
and I think in terms of the unknown,
what a reconfiguration means, you know, there's been talk
of cohorts and, and,
and, you know, your, your question was,
was really was so compelling about, you know,
being able to check in with your ESOL teacher.
Um, I mean, I know my son still says hi
to his kindergarten teacher every morning who's out here in
the audience and he's in second grade.
And, and, and there's a, there's, there's a sense of comfort
for children when they recognize the adults in the building
over and over and over again and grow up with those adults.
So I don't wanna dismiss that.
Um, and I think that's more than a neighborhood school
that's just a community school of adults that, that know
and, and are supporting our children.
Um, so, so how do we it with reconfiguration,
with the, with the two to four campuses
and the pre-K through one and,
and how, especially this first year for a lot
of parents next year, how do we,
what will the reconfiguration look like?
So if I'm looking at, can we bring up, um,
what's a better way to look at this?
Is that one with a three Bullet?
Sure. So if we're looking at,
So in, in this one, in terms of
what happens at each building, is that your question?
So if we're looking at option 1.3, which is close
k reconfigure other schools, right?
We have two, two through four campuses.
And so where, how are we allocating the students to
skill in and how are we allocating students to brown?
Um, is, is that based on, I mean,
geography in terms of address, or is,
or is it just a total lottery?
You know, that's a huge unknown to me that,
that I know a lot of parents would, including myself,
would like some transparency on
before I can make any kind of decision on a
Sure. And again,
it is impossible to take a thousand kids
and model them in nine scenarios so that
those are the next set of questions.
But we do need some guidance
and you have options that are not reconfiguration in front
of you, but if that is, but
How would you re But,
but you have to have some sense of
how you would reconfigure.
I mean, you, the initial proposal we saw in, in November
and December and January was, that was only that. So
Sure. It's on grade
bands.
And we would be looking for a distribution
of characteristics across our schools.
So that is going to mean that our current, we,
we would not be mirroring our current attendance zones
into those new models.
We would have to look for new division lines,
because again, as long as you go east west,
you're gonna replicate the same issues.
So we have to think about north, south divisions as well
as we're looking at the district,
North south, meaning on a map or some, yeah.
Okay. So it's still based on, it still has to be based on
location to to, I mean,
you're saying other characteristics. Yes.
What are those other characteristics?
But choose five different neighborhoods from across the
school and have them go to one all the neighborhoods.
I don't have to be I see
What you're saying. Okay.
Uh, next to each other.
Got it. Okay. Uh, member Smith.
Um, so I came to the district,
I moved here four years ago, um,
and really started paying attention
to what's going on in the district,
I think probably 18 months ago or so.
Um, and it's what led me to, to where I am now.
Um, I have a background in education and when I came here
and I heard about kind of
what seemed like financial mismanagement, it was interesting
because it sounded very similar to what I've seen in lots
of districts across the country.
Um, and so one, I think one thing that I want to, one thing
that I think is getting conflated in the discussion
that we're having that I want to separate is the
mismanagement that might
or might not have been happening with the budget.
And now there's a lot of decisions, I don't know
what they looked like 1, 2, 3, 4 years ago.
And the bigger picture squeezes that our district is feeling
that many, many other people across the state
and the country are feeling, right?
Because I think what we're doing now,
and I think, you know, which is very understandable,
is saying, you know, there's been a lot
of issues about communication, a lot of challenges,
and finding where money is going in our district.
And so that is the reason that we're having to cut seven
and a half million dollars out of our budget next year.
But I don't think those two things are exactly connected.
Um, there's a lot of issues that are,
that are causing an increase in, in cost.
Um, many of them related to COVID, right?
So when we get, uh, our COVID era relief funds, three years
of funding that runs out, we used a lot of
that money towards our educator workforce
because we had a huge influx
of new Mainers that we needed to support.
And I think that was the right way
to spend money in the short term.
It was a way that we needed to handle
what we were given in a use it or lose it situation.
And that running out of funds has created a kind
of fiscal cliff that we're seeing in lots of places
around the country around that running out of funds.
And now you have more staff than you do students.
Um, and many of those staff are needed now
that our students have much higher needs.
Right? The other thing to think about here is
a huge factor in our cost is staff retention.
The more teachers stay in our district,
the more they're gonna get paid.
Everyone I've heard from across this district is telling me
about how much they love their teacher first and foremost.
And I think the experience and knowledge
and tenure that we have from our staff is crucial to
what makes us a district, um, where people wanna live,
where people want to teach, where people wanna stay.
Um, and so keeping good teachers is expensive,
and frankly, teachers aren't getting paid
enough money in Maine.
The salaries are kind of un unbelievably low to me.
When my wife
and I moved here, um,
she was a public middle school teacher in Massachusetts.
She came here, we looked at Maine public school salaries,
and we said, we probably can't afford to buy a house if we,
if she stays as a teacher, right?
And that's true in South Portland as much it is is in many,
many parts of this, um, this state.
And so a lot of what's happening here, and I wanna say this
because I think what it will do is take,
I don't think there's any individual in this room
or any set of circumstances that has caused this problem
because of mismanagement.
I think there has definitely been mismanagement,
which has made maybe the problem worse.
But what I think primarily what we're looking at is a number
of squeezes in terms of declining enrollment in, in terms
of, uh, increases in healthcare costs for teachers,
increases in operational costs due to inflation.
All of these things that are coming together at a head.
And these are issues that we're solving
together as a community.
This is not, we're fixing something that was a mistake.
Mm-hmm. I, those things definitely there, there may
or may not have been mistakes that have happened,
but there are bigger issues at play here
that I think is really important to, to level set.
Um, and so I just wanna mention that as a way of kind
of changing the conversation from like,
I think this is just something that we have
to solve together, and we have to look at the opportunities
and options that we've been given,
and we need to come to a conclusion that's equitable
and that works for most people.
Um, I, I've talked for a long time,
I don't really have any questions.
I'm just gonna pass it from there.
Yeah, that's okay. Thank you. Other questions?
Uh, member Davidson.
Alright. Uh, and you might be able to answer this, Joe,
um, for option 1.9,
what does pre-K at the high school look like?
Um, I see in the notes
that it says there would be a separate pre-K wing.
Um, do you mind elaborating?
Sure. Um, the high school, you may be aware
has about 400 students fewer than it did four years ago,
which that means that, um, you know, um,
we have still managed to fill all of those spaces,
but as we think about the potential for reconfiguration,
we do believe using the old entrance to the building
as a separate pre-K entrance that is, uh, has the potential
to become a secure vestibule like the others.
And there could be modifications made
to the hallway when you come into the right there making
that a secure space.
Uh, so high school students would
not pass through that space.
Um, but that it could function
and meet the needs of the, the six pre-K classrooms.
There are specific requirements for pre-K spaces
with regards to, um, how far bathrooms can be spaces,
egress and outdoor play spaces.
So those are something to consider.
But again, we,
we knew there might be strong feelings about increasing the
use of portables,
and we wanted to look if any
of our current footprint might have the ability
to accommodate some classrooms.
Certainly we realized that that would mean
there are currently classes happening in that hallway
and teachers whose spaces are there.
It would mean change for those teachers
that we would need to think through.
Um, but again, we wanted to be thoughtful with
using the footprint of our current campuses, um,
as an option for the board to consider.
Thank you. Member Holman.
Um, uh, another thing I, I think that is, well this is part
of the, uh, some ideas.
So, uh, we know that, um, when you have fewer students,
that affects the state's funding formula.
And in addition, when the,
when your city is considered richer, like, you know, we had
that reevaluation, that reevaluation was triggered
because real estate values went up.
State has no state law.
We had the, the city had to reevaluate
and many people, you know, and your taxes went up.
A lot of few live in South Portland, maybe other towns too.
But, so both of those, so once the city,
once the state sees you as a richer town, that also affects
how much money you get from the state.
And maybe you can talk to us a little bit
about what that summary may be.
Maybe that's Abigail, I don't know who would tell us,
but what, what is, what have we lost
by having fewer students and
being considered a wealthier town?
Sure. I can speak a little bit to it
and then see if Abigail has anything to add to it.
Um, the state funding formula does use a couple different
local metrics to try
and balance how they distribute funds across the state.
So your assessed valuation does impact the percent of funds
that you get from the state.
Um, so that has been one piece.
The enrollment, they do average over a few years,
so it's not as devastating year over year.
But unfortunately both of those things work against us.
However, because we do have a high, um, population
of students in special education
and our multilingual,
we do get some additional funds from the state.
So our, our projected, uh,
contribution from the state is not
drastically different than what we thought for next year.
But I don't know anything to add there.
Thank you. Thank you.
Uh, member feller and then Member Dowling. Uh,
Can you turn to slide 14 please?
You bet. Yeah.
So I think this is a really important artifact, um,
that deserves more intention, uh,
than we've currently given it.
Um, you know, if you look at option 1.4,
I almost think there should be a option 1.4 B.
So option 1.4 considers redistricting just the students
from, um, the school that would be unfortunately closed.
Um, you could imagine a graduated redistricting
because this does not seem like kids are going
to the school that's closest to them.
This seems like a legacy of what's been done in the past.
Um, it's a pretty simple math problem to figure out where
to send kids based on their neighborhood proximity.
And I'm not suggesting redistricting kids
who are currently in, in an elementary school, right.
Let them finish their elementary ed education
wherever they are now we have all this data on kids
screening for pre-K, so we know where they live
and we know they're gonna enter the district.
Why not? As they come into, uh, elementary age, assign them
to the school that's closest to them
that could conceivably eliminate the $540,000
in additional building costs if we create
equilibrium across the schools.
Right. Have the schools at the same operating capacity,
not some disjoint capacity in terms of
how many kids are at each school.
It's more of a comment than a question. So, sorry,
The only thing that I will say is that if,
in the example that you gave, if skill
and is considered foreclosure,
we do not have enough seats in the other four buildings
to meet projected enrollment.
So apologies if I missed what your suggestion was there,
but even if we balanced,
we're still gonna have demands for space
For sure. I was specifically
talking about option 1.4,
Um, oh, apologies.
Okay. So a closure of one of the smaller buildings.
So yes, there, there could be some logic there.
We would have some pain points in that transition, um,
because running two models is challenging,
but certainly, um,
you know, something that we could look at. Thanks.
Thank you member Dowling.
Thank you. Um, I,
I find myself having an increasingly long list of skill
and related questions, but
before I I delve into any of that,
I'll just ask a process question,
which is the executive team.
Are you looking, um, for any kind
of guidance from us tonight on, um, these options?
Or is that something that you will ask us at a a
future workshop?
Sure. Um, for next week, our charge is
to bring forward the superintendent's budget.
To do so. We have to use a model
to put the whole puzzle together
based on our recommendation, the model
that would come forward next week,
unless we heard overwhelming, um, objection to
that would be that 1.7,
which scored most highly in ours.
Can, can you put that on the You bet. Sorry. Um,
So I, I just wanna address that to the board.
If, if the board has a, a feeling where there's a, a,
a four
or more members who feel one other option, whether it's one
of the three that the, uh, leadership team recommended
or one of the others, then that, that's
what would be presented in the budget.
So the default is the position.
If we don't come to a a, a, um, if there,
if there is not four
or more of us who feel strongly about one position,
the default position
that the superintendent will put in the budget is 1.7.
I think it's important to note though, that
because we've modeled these out tonight is not a a voting,
you don't vote in workshops.
So we did not anticipate you would be taking a vote.
We thought maybe we would get some indication of preference.
Um, so again, if the board next week took action
and said, we don't think it should be 1.7 that you modeled,
we think it should be insert whatever one it is,
we would be prepared to swap that out.
But it wouldn't happen in real time at next
Monday's board meeting.
It would then be in the subsequent, uh, those of you
who have been through this before, we spend the month
of March in conversation
and, um, testing out assumptions.
Um, so again, we, we did not anticipate
that you would feel prepared to
or could take a vote this evening,
but we do need to model something for you to look at
because as many of you have said
and others that we've heard from, we do need
to zoom back out now and see the whole picture
before we then continue to, to tackle the smaller change,
or not smaller, but the segments
of the budget as we move through it. Okay.
So thank you for that and sort of to try to be helpful
and give you some idea of, of where I'm at.
Um, and this is not a vote,
but this is just sharing feelings mm-hmm.
With the, given the information that,
that we all have right now.
And, um, knowing a lot of the background, I, I can tell you
that the option I would find myself
unable to support would be 1.7.
Um, and I could probably spend 15 minutes explaining why
giving history that goes back to shortly after World War ii.
But our audience has been waiting very patiently
for over 100 minutes.
So I'm not going to give that history talk tonight.
Um, but I, I wanted to give the executive team some,
some idea of where I am. So if
I could ask a question to you member Dowling, uh,
because this will be helpful in going forward,
you're saying you could not support 1.7, uh,
but that leaves 1.3 and 1.8.
1.8 also closes skill.
And are you saying that you would not support 1.8 as well?
Thank you. Um, my,
my eyes are getting blurry and I didn't see that.
You can look behind. Yeah. So, so what I, what I,
what I was trying to say is,
given the information I have right now, I cannot support,
um, a, an option or a model that, that closes skill in.
I could potentially support
Others. That's helpful. Thank you.
Uh, are there other,
other questions before I speak?
I I don't wanna speak until everybody has spoken speak.
You should speak. No, I don't wanna speak.
If you're going to speak Member
Pell speak or do you want Go ahead.
I, I second what, uh,
member Delling would say I would not support, uh,
1.7 or 1.8.
Okay. So there, there, uh, member Richardson, uh, I
Also don't support 1.7 or 1.8.
I'm in, I'm in more of the 1.4 range.
Okay. So there's, But that is not up there,
But yeah, but there's, if I have to pick one
Yeah, but there's Three, but there's what? But
There's what? No, I'm just saying, but there,
but there's, so there's,
you're now the third person
who doesn't support closing skill
and that's all I'm trying to get. Can I
Just ask one clarifying question about Yes, please.
The budget for next week.
So decision aside isn't,
it really isn't next week just you just need a find,
you just need a placeholder number wise.
'cause you're gonna show us everything else
in the proposed budget.
So you're not necessarily gonna be hammering out the details
of how to reconfigure
and it's really just, it's really just a number.
Right? And you could put a range, couldn't you?
Uh, based on whatever
I would, I would propose that we not do a range.
'cause I think you, you do need to see
what the bottom line is
and how that distributes across areas in order to do that.
And we also know that our, our staff are
waiting anxiously for this information.
It has massive disruption for them.
And the sooner that we move forward
and can be clear with members of our staff
that their position is at risk,
the sooner we can help those folks land on their feet.
So, uh, we, we would put a full model in.
Again, if we leave here and it's clear that it's not 1.7
or 1.8 that the board is in favor
of, we will do something else.
But it does need to be one of the plans that we start with.
Okay. Member Holman. So what, what we
Sorry, she's not finished.
Oh, I'm sorry. Sorry. Yeah,
Go, go ahead. Only because you
brought it up
and it's been something I've been wanting to ask.
Um, do we have a plan
for a more human approach to a reduction in force?
Not using email, having face-to-face conversations?
Can, can we talk, I mean, that was a disaster last year, so,
and, and I don't, and if you're talking about, you know,
staff waiting or are they going, is that
as soon as next Monday? So,
Uh, we would, we're planning to share
with you on Monday more about that notification plan
and timeline again.
Um, we, we heard the feedback, uh, from last year
and we're, we're eager to improve upon that.
Um, so we'll have more of an update on that for next week.
Thank you. Mm-hmm. Thank you. Member Richardson.
Uh, member Holman. Yeah, I
Have a question. If you could go
back to this, the, uh, ma options
and matrix combined slide.
Um, so on the bottom of 1.7
and 1.8 where it says it talks about portables, um,
do we already have those portables?
No, we have, was The cost of that in included in there?
Correct. That's what know what you see in column P here.
Uh, one portable for purchase is 270,000.
That's with installation.
We also do have an option for a hundred thousand
for a rental.
Um, that includes the installation fee.
We have modeled this on purchase.
So in the models with five 40,
we anticipate needing two portables for a hundred seats.
In the ones with two 70, we anticipate one portable,
I think that's Here, and three 70,
we would need a portable
and construction at the high school.
That's why that figure is different.
Says, well, can't see that.
Remember Holman, do you have more questions?
No. Oh, Okay. Uh,
I don't think so. Uh, maybe, I don't know.
Well, I'm, I'm just trying to, trying to get them
before I speak, remember. It could be. So,
Um, I just had a clarifying question.
I don't know if you already like, talked about it
or at least I don't remember.
But, um, I was wondering how like districting would go so
that like schools are more diverse so
that not one school has more. Um,
Angela can I'm sorry,
could you speak into the microphone? So Yeah, yeah.
Thank you. I was wondering how districting would go so
that schools are like more diverse.
Sure. I think that was a little bit, um,
remember Richardson's question in that we know
what those goals are,
but in terms of the actual mechanics of which neighborhoods,
which streets, in order to make that we needed more clarity
around which plans the board was interested in.
Okay. So, uh, we don't have the mechanics
of exactly what that looks like.
Um, but we know that we would have to address
that if the plan considers the redistricting
Actually think, I just wanna, I just wanna, uh, ask again.
Um, so there's, there's a's a feeling
amongst the board right now about not closing skill in,
can I, I'd just like to review what those thoughts are.
I dunno if we can do that. We're, if
There's any opportunity for that.
We, we can't because we're, well, I, I mean,
we just have three board members who have said they're not,
they're not interested in closing skill
and I, I wanna be able to move to public comment.
So I'm just trying to sort
of get a feeling if people have questions for Joe,
now's the time to ask them.
And if you have an opinion about
Maybe, maybe Joe can answer that, then maybe.
So why, why close skill in as opposed
to some other schools in your opinion?
Other than is it just the
Money? I, I think the reason that
that rose is the significant, uh,
cost of that facility.
I think the other, uh, part of the calculus is that some of,
you know, we are interested in moving
to one start time at the middle school
by taking a school on Westcott Road offline.
It does reduce, uh, congestion on Westcott Road.
Again, hypothetical thinking that that could
help us move in another way.
Um, so I think from a facilities standpoint,
there are important considerations.
I think board members Smiths, um,
concerns about who's in movement in a plan,
give us pause with that option as well.
Um, and our, uh, concern that
we talked over at length.
Thank you. Any
other comments or questions?
I just, just
Quickly Want Yeah, please.
I just wanna say that I think I'd be kind
of moving in the direction of 1.3
or 1.4 if 1.4 also considered pretty
significant redistricting.
Thank you. Any other folks? Yeah,
Sorry, just one more question.
Yes. When will we know what redistricting looks like?
What is our target goal to understand that?
And would it be before we vote on the budget?
Again, we don't know if you're choosing a plan
that has redistricting. Okay. Let's
Say we are. Because,
because I think transparency on that process is,
is really part of what I need as a board member
to decide which propo, I mean, I need
to understand the plan for that.
Sure. Um, because at one point we were trying
to hire an expert for that
through the boundaries and configuration.
So I think that's, I think, I think I would like
to identify a target date for that.
And if it, and my hope is that, that you'll say it's
before we approve the budget.
If that's a requirement for the board,
then we will work on that.
I don't want to make that date up alone.
I, I need to talk to my colleagues in terms of, uh,
the folks that we have already began to talk
to about doing some consultancy around the bus routes
and those pieces of it.
So certainly next Monday we can update you with a,
a realistic date, um, based on sort
of the partners we would need to work with.
Thank you. Any,
are there any other comments or questions before I speak?
Uh, member Kabisa,
Um, I don't really know how like I would word this,
but I'm just gonna go say it as I go.
Um, like with 1.8, I think, you know,
I with like, uh, redistricting
and I see like the reason why some members are against like
closing skill in and things like that.
Um, but I think if we knew how like, uh,
redistricting would work,
I think 1.8 would be a good idea only
because like in this case scenario, like students are able
to be in like a school community for a long time
and that they don't have to move
until like fifth grade and go to the middle school.
They don't have to move four times. Um,
I don't, and you're correct that
that's the significant difference between 1.7
and 1.8 mm-hmm.
Is that in 1.7, um,
they both require reconfiguration,
but in 1.7 it's by grade bands in 1.8,
it's four schools that are pre-K through four.
Again, both do require like redistricting
where students attend as a one time thing,
but you're correct that they don't have
that transition as a difference.
And I was just gonna, uh, ask again, like for districting,
what exactly are you looking for the board to like do again?
So, uh, there's, there's two parts to this.
Uh, the board by policy sets attendance zones.
So again, there's sort of two parts.
There's a budget part of this
that you're giving us guidance on.
And if we move in the direction of a redistricting,
then you would at some point have
to take action on a policy to stay.
If you live on these streets, you go to this school.
Um, so again,
but that would follow your sort of indication that that's a,
the plan you wanna go towards.
Okay, Thank you.
Any other questions here?
Do, do you have questions? Member Holman?
Well, not really question,
but I thought that, uh, um, uh,
assistant superintendent Prince's comment about, uh,
the traffic on that road up there if skill
and is closed was of interest.
That is something I hadn't considered at all
and hadn't come up and that, that, uh,
makes me, it makes me pause.
Any other comments at this end?
Okay. Seeing no other comments from the board, I,
I will just make a couple closing comments.
First I, before we go to public comment by the audience, um,
first I, I, I did make a comment at the last meeting about
saying that we don't have neighborhood schools,
and I wanted to clarify what I meant.
So my definition of neighborhood schools is when
more than 90% of the kids who go to that school can walk.
So as I said at a previous meeting when I started
teaching in South Portland, there were 11
elementary schools, 11.
And in all those schools, 90%
or more of the kids could walk that.
So those were, by my definition neighborhood schools.
So it, there are schools
that range anywhere from 86% who can walk to
32% who can walk.
Those are not in my estimation neighborhood schools.
So if the majority of kids are either
bust or in one school where there's a high percentage
of kids who can walk, 34% of them
who could walk don't.
So that that means they're being driven
to school by parents.
And that's adding to our congestion, that's adding to
the problems we're having
with traffic in the elementary schools.
So I understand when people, um,
are attached to their school as a community, and,
and I get that and I understand that.
Um, but for me that's, that that's the difference between
what I call a neighborhood school.
It's not a neighborhood school just because Fred
and Mary's kids get to walk,
but it's, if the far majority, 90% of kids can walk.
And that used to exist in South Portland,
but it doesn't anymore.
The other thing I wanted to talk about is
because I've received a number of emails about this
and it, the comment was made tonight about Kaler school, um,
and about the being near the oil tanks, I have met
with the city, uh, we have received information from DEP.
There have been tests done by the, um,
water resource department.
There is no basement in Kayla School.
There is no groundwater, there's no runoff.
Those kids are totally safe.
So while I appreciate people's concern for that, um,
that that is a non-issue.
Um, the other thing I wanted to say is
while there were recommendations brought
before this board from boundaries
and configurations, this board did not take any action
to accept or refute any of those,
which is why we didn't do anything
because there was not formal action by this board
to accept any of those recommendations.
Um, I I also wanted to say,
because I wanna caution everybody about this,
we do not have a deficit, the seven, now it's really closer
to $8 million that we need to cut.
We need to cut in order to come within the guidance
of a 6% increase in our budget.
If we had a deficit, it would mean that we owed money.
We don't, we could, but we don't.
So, um, yeah,
so the $8 million is so that we come within the guidelines.
I will, um, chime in as the fourth person
who does not support the closing of Taylor School.
If we could put the map back up on here.
I wanna show a point.
Um, and that's that
if you look at this map, um,
and the cash corner is between that green
and purple line, right?
Right. Like it's, it's right in there.
Skill and school is the only school west, west
of the Dairy Queen, which is what I use as my marker
that's cash corner west of the Dairy Queen.
So if we were to close Kayla Skill
and School, we're basically saying that
all the families west of the Dairy Queen,
so everybody in Brick Hill, Cortland courts, um,
red Bank, country Garden, sunset Park, Thornton Heights,
everybody there would be bust from pre-K
through fourth grade.
And oh, when your, when your child gets to go
to middle school, oh, they, no, oh, they could walk now.
You know, like that to me is
what board member Smith talked about with the, the,
the major concern.
And um, and I really appreciated his comments
and um, and,
and there was concurrence by other board members.
But, um, when I look at that
cash corner there, there are no parks west
of Cash Corner except for Sawyer Park, which is up
behind Aroma Joe's,
which nobody in their right mind would go there to just sort
of hang out for a picnic, you know?
I mean, it's noisy and it's congested
and it it, there, there's nothing desirable about it.
There's no other park, there's no green belt west
of the Dairy Queen that we're already,
we're already saying west of the Dairy Queen
is just for economically challenged or brown and black kids
or, um, or marginalized in some way.
Okay? And you don't deserve anything over here.
But everybody else east of the Dairy Queen, like,
let's pack everything in there,
let's pack in all our schools, all our restaurants,
all our facilities, the Green Belt, our parks, everything
is east of Cash Corner.
And for me, that is just abhorrent.
I mean, I have a reaction
to these recommendations because of that.
I, I think when,
if we're talking about, I mean, so it does create
greater diversity, you know,
you get a more diverse population
because you mix up all these brown and black kids
and bring 'em over to the other side
and give 'em the privilege of going to school
with white people, you know, and mix 'em all up.
But it does not address the issue of equity.
It does not address the issue of equity at all.
And so for me to even consider, which I don't
either, one point, one point, whatever those two points are
that were thank you, seven
and eight, um, I would wanna know how are we going
to ensure equity with greater diversity?
What's, what's the training? What's the protocols?
What's the structures, what's the plans, what's the policy?
And if we're going to pass from, in order
to pass from diversity to equity,
like diversity is not the only issue just mixing up kids,
which is why I did not support the recommendations
of the boundaries and configurations com committee
because it was only about diversity
and there was no plan for equity.
And they're two very, very different things.
So, and moving from equity is when you get
to belonging.
So in equity, you know, do you have inclu inclusivity,
you know, which is just in between diversity and equity.
And so what are the, what are the ways that we're going
to engage families?
What's the integration?
What's the, this isn't just picking up kids
and putting them on a bus
and bringing them over to
where the privileged populations live, which is east of
that cash corner.
So there's at least four people on this board
who say, I do not support the closure of skilling.
So that's off the table as far as I'm concerned
and as far as this board is concerned.
So I would suggest, um, that
that, and,
and so for me, for my money, I, I know, um, council,
uh, board member Smith spoke to this like
1.3 or, or 1.6,
which both save approximately the same amount of money.
They closed different schools.
Um, the, the, my,
my angst about closing Kaler is it is the second most
marginalized population in our community.
You know, I spoke with one friend of mine who, who could
toss a rock to KA school where her daughter goes
and I said, what if
Sally couldn't go to Kayla next year?
And she said, is the school district gonna provide
a bus to get her there?
Because I leave for work really early in the morning
and I just need to know that my parents
can walk her to the bus.
And I said, yeah, that would absolutely happen.
She said, then it's okay.
Now, she did not grow up in this country.
She did not originate here.
So part of the reason we're looking out in this population
that is not represented is
because there are people in this community who are just
grateful that their kids are gonna get to go
to public school who are just grateful
that there's even a bus that's gonna come to pick them up.
And so they're not, they're not here to say,
pull their hair out and scream, oh, you know,
I'm gonna have two different drop offs and pickups.
Like, I grew up in a poor family and we had one car.
My father took it to work, my mother walked to work.
We were four kids and we walked to school.
Like there was not an option.
So if you look at skill in school,
there's only 47% of the kids who can walk.
But 72% of those kids who could do
it's higher than any other school.
And you have to ask yourself, well, I wonder why that is.
Well, probably the reason why it is, is
because they don't have a choice.
Like they need to walk.
Their parents are working two jobs, you know, there's four
or five kids in the family, they're figuring out how
to make it in this world.
And so I just cringe at the idea
that we would make a decision as a board.
And so I was really happy to hear the position of
so many people tonight that we would make a, a decision
as a board just based on finances.
And I know we have to do some hard things
and we're going to do them,
but not at the expense of our most marginalized population.
So, um, thank you.
We will go to public comment, um,
and I will read the public comment.
Um, public comment portion of the agenda is an opportunity
for the board to listen to opinions of the public
that related to school and educational matters.
On or off. If I can just have it a little bit quiet
please, I'd appreciate it.
Um, anyone wishing to speak will be asked to proceed
to the microphone and state your name and just give the town
or city where you live.
You'll be given three minutes to speak.
As a reminder, school board meetings are broadcast,
live recorded, and posted on the city's website.
So please consider the impact of your comments.
I would ask that we refrain from any clapping or booing
or any reaction to anybody's comments.
We can just be respectful and listen carefully.
And thank you. I was,
my next thing was gonna be can we line up so
that we can be ready and I can see you can do that.
So the first person can come down and you can, uh,
and you're just gonna, this microphone is, um, not terribly
sensitive, so if you can just lean into it as best you can
and, um, speak as clearly
and as slowly as you can to remember
that not everyone is a native English speaker.
So, thank you. Go ahead.
Hi, I am Kelly Bertino. Um, I live on Highland Ave.
My children go to Brown and I work at small school.
Um, I just wanna say thank you especially to Abigail
for putting that information all in a digestible,
um, manner for all of us.
It was a ton of information, um,
but it doesn't make it any easier a pill to swallow.
Um, thinking about redistricting,
I did just wanna echo the board's point that
in considering closing skill in
and ka, um, we are looking at, um, inconveniencing families
that are disproportionately lower income.
Um, something
that was not mentioned at this presentation tonight,
but was mentioned at the PTA leadership meeting is
that if we're looking at redistricting, they're not looking
to change the start or end times to the school day.
Uh, so pre-K to one schools
and two to four schools will be starting
and ending at the same times.
And, um, just considering my family's experience, uh, I go,
I go to work with our only car
at six o'clock in the morning.
I'm a, I'm a kitchen manager at small school.
Um, and so that will leave my husband chaperoning a walker
to Brown School at the same time he's supposed
to be chaperoning, um, my kindergartner
who will presumably be bused somewhere else.
And, um, I guess I just wanted to reiterate that, um, if
that's my experience
as a white middle class family in the Brown School District,
it's probably gonna be much more difficult, um,
for families at Skill In or ka.
And I just, I guess I would like the board
and the district to consider that it's not just
that we don't wanna lose our neighborhood schools, it's
that we're not sure logistically, financially, realistically
how we will make two drop offs at the same time work.
I mean, more than two for many families. Thank you. Thank
You very much, Kelly. Mm-hmm.
Can you hold one second for us to figure out timing?
I'm, I'm doing it all set with it. I got it. Yeah. Great.
Thanks. Sorry, Sharon. Go ahead, Sarah. It's possible's
Possible. Hi everybody. Uh,
s Gay.
I am a parent resident, um, educator
and president of the South Portland Teachers Association.
Um, I am reading and sharing, uh, questions
and comments from our members, um, some of whom are
sending these in real time remotely
and some of whom we're not able
to attend in any fashion, have shared their thoughts.
Um, so I'm going to begin
and I, fellow officers are going to continue.
Um, we will also send these by email
so you don't have to write too fast.
Um, all right. First
and the biggest is when can we expect an update about
how many in which positions will be cut?
Um, note that on March 5th last year,
that was the day at upon which everyone received emails of
varying degrees of not greatness.
Um, so we're feeling anxious about the timeline.
Um, glad to hear, uh, chair DeAngelo sort of
rediscuss the concept of neighborhood schools.
I think that that question of whether the definition
of neighborhood is based on walking
or sense of community is something that a lot of us have
had pretty firm opinions about.
So glad to hear that from you.
Um, some questions, um, concerns about the timeline
of notification for staff, um,
and bigger picture concerns
that staff are not certain if they can rely on their
positions and are hoping for more clarity.
Um, question.
Are we accounting for space for learning
that takes place already outside
of a traditional full group classroom setting?
We already have issues with space for specialized services
and small group instruction for students
with unique learning needs.
Multilingual gift
and talented special education students
receiving MTSS services.
Um, a great deal of that work happens in hallways
and stairwells, and we would
like to know if that will continue.
Um, would skill in then big picture become part
of the greater SPMS campus?
Um, would that create space
for increased parking outdoor space for students?
And then it sounds like we're already thinking about traffic
changes leading to a potential unified start time.
Um, question about the acronym mentioned, uh, on the slide
related to DEI, um, it was BCSC, um,
in regards to a literature review.
Curious what that acronym is.
Some logistical and financial questions.
Uh, column m in the elementary schools model overview tab,
we're wondering if that represents local
and bonded funds being spent on capital projects,
or if that is only local funded capital project expenses.
Um, we have questions about who designed the matrix.
Um, haven't we all asked that question? Sorry.
Um, uh, was anyone consulted
or included in this process beyond 30 seconds administrators
and central office staff?
Um, we'd like to see the rubric because we love rubrics.
Um, how is it more equitable to shut down a school,
the one school that is physically local
to the significantly lower income
western portion of the city?
How are we measuring or defining our schools as diverse?
What data is being used
to make determinations about which schools are succeeding
or struggling with DEI initiatives?
What researcher data has been considered in regards
to the SEL impacts
of these changes on our children and staff?
Um, can we hear what the financial implications
are of considering?
That's three minutes, Sarah, a pass through model for all
of our pre-K programming, and
I'm really glad you're sending those questions.
Thank you. Continue, Abby?
Sure. I'm Abby Anderson, uh, SPTA vp.
Continuing with the logistics questions.
What will the cap of the length
of a bus ride for a student be?
Um, fi financially the plan 1.9 is the
second highest in financial savings.
So why isn't it being discussed as a top three plan?
Why are the fiscal long-term ratings
and column K of plans 1.8
and 1.9 so different when they save
approximately the same amount of money?
Why are we bonding out $5 million
for athletic fields while the HVAC system at skilling is
suddenly so expensive that we have
to shut down the only school west of the highway?
Is there any way to change
how those tax dollars are allocated?
Uh, moving on to classroom based concerns,
class size changes may seem reasonable from the outside,
but the difference between 20
and 24 students in an elementary classroom is enormous.
Significantly more difficult
to provide timely individualized feedback
and targeted support, both
of which are essential to student success.
One of our district's greatest assets is the depth
and authenticity of the relationships between schools
and community staff and students and families and educators.
Many staff are worried that these deep,
long-term relationships will be at risk if families are
passed around at short intervals reminder, uh, of the power
and importance of continuity for our youngest students
and their families since we began
adequately resourcing skill and,
and k with smaller class sizes
and more staff, not just classroom teachers,
but also intervention staff, et cetera.
What has the achievement data shown us?
Have we seen an increase
or no change in achievement at those two schools
after we implemented the then current recommendations from
the Boundaries and configurations committee at the time?
Why are we not looking at using the three classrooms
that we built at the community center for pre-K?
Do we have projected enrollment
for elementary over the next five years?
Will the proposed reconfigurations oh oh support
those numbers moving forward?
Um, and have we consulted with any other nearby districts
that have closed schools recently or,
or that have reconfigured or
otherwise made changes on this scale?
That is our questions. We will email all of those to you.
Hi, my name's Catherine.
Um, I'm a parent at, um, small school.
Um, and I just wanted to kind of echo what, um,
board member KSA and board member, um, Richardson
and fellow were talking about in terms of, um,
the psychological impact of this on our children
and how the community is, call it what you will.
Community neighborhood schools
is a huge reason that people move here.
And having that consistency as a young child, I think
is extremely important for the young developing child
to have the them know their teacher, their janitor,
everyone in their community that is there
and whether they walk or drive, it's their community.
Um, also I just wanna touch on, um,
what, uh, board member Feller was saying about
maybe looking further into another plan that would,
I think everyone kind of touched on that,
but just, um, incorporating another option.
And I think board Member re was, as he said,
this just feels, I think to a lot of us really premature to
be moving forward so quickly as, um,
board member Richardson said too that this just, we, we need
to know more details about what's happening before.
I think we can all kind of get behind this.
Um, and I think it's, I agree that we,
of course we want equity and, and diversity.
I, I think that a lot of the reason, not to dismiss
what you said, board member D'Angelo,
but I think it should be also said that some
of those members, the black
and brown community, are not here because they can't be.
Absolutely. 'cause they work night shift
because they have multiple children
and they probably don't even know that some
of this is even happening.
Totally agree. So I just think
that should be recognized also to mention,
I think the impact that hasn't been mentioned on our town,
if this happens, people look at schools,
elementary schools in particular, when they move
to a town they wanna know
and they're not gonna be excited about a school
that's sending their kid to one school for two years,
one school for another two years,
one school for another two years.
That's so disruptive.
I know I wouldn't, I'm gonna move to a town
that would have a more centralized
30 seconds School.
So I think that then impacts our budget
because maybe the enrollment decreases.
I just think it's something to think about.
Um, but I appreciate all the work that's been done in this
and hopefully we can find a solution to move forward.
Thank you.
Hello, my name is Raso and I live in Bun Bank Terra.
My husband and I, we have four Childrens
two currently attending a Sao Middle School and one at Diet
and our younger, hopefully he can make it
to pre-K next year.
So my husband and I, we work full time
and we also go to school full time.
So, um,
when my son broke his leg last year, we struggle to
accommodate him with the crutches and the transportation.
So these changes that you guys gonna bus everybody.
So it really concerns my family reconfiguration.
What significant impact our family children's,
my children's go to Boys
and Girls Club also, um, when my husband work
and when I work, um, this mean the change in
school placements affects our ability
to get our children safe where they need to be.
So for a family like mine, working parents
with one car, multiple school schedules
and childrens who rely on aftercare, school
reconfiguration is not just an small adjustment.
It has a major impact in our lives,
our ability to work and our children stability.
Thank you.
Hi there. I'm Jenny Lika.
I live on Bauer Street
and I have a kindergartner, second grader
and fourth grader at small school.
Um, while I understand the viewpoint of why we started
in talking about elementary changes, uh, the idea
that this would be a harder one to execute on.
So we wanted to start it sooner
so people would know what was going on.
I do just need to point out that on December 17th, the union
president asked to know the historical data,
showing the changes in the administration as far
as the administrative office, the central office, the number
of new positions that
We've had. Then if you could just talk into
the microphone. Yeah, sure.
Yeah. Not turning the other way. 'cause we lose your voice.
They're all there. They're, they're, we're okay.
You're talking to us. Thank you. So
I, the fact that we ha don't have
that information three months later gives me, leaves me
with so many questions.
And even just from a leadership perspective, the fact
that we're starting with talking about elementary schools
instead of talking about administration leaves me really
disappointed and really sad for our teachers
who clearly should be the ones who we are protecting.
And looking at last, not first.
Um, I Know that
1.2, no, no closure
or no reconfiguration was listed as more analysis needed.
And uh, that's my vote.
1.2 is why don't we look at this from a
historical perspective.
There are 82 positions that have been created since 2017.
Can we please look at the descriptions of those positions,
what they are and what can be eliminated?
I'm not saying we wholesale
eliminate every single one of them.
I'll be the first one up here to say the DEI position was
created since 2017 and I think that should stay.
And I think everybody on this stage agrees with
that based on what I've heard.
But I'm saying why is reconfiguration the number one choice?
Why can't we look at some other options for
unfortunately eliminating jobs, which I hate even saying,
but anytime we say reconfiguration,
we're talking about eliminating jobs.
So I'd prefer to look at it from a historical perspective.
'cause I just think that makes more sense in my brain.
Um, Abigail said that there hasn't been
time hasn't, there hasn't been enough time
to make a cuts with no goal in mind.
She talked about cuts with no goal in mind.
Um, and I just think we can create other goals
other than reconfiguration.
And if that's what she's asking for school board members,
maybe you should create those other ideas for them.
They need ideas for making cuts other than 30
seconds than reconfiguration 30.
Uh, Tyler talked about wanting to solve this problem
as a community and what I have seen thus far
is trying to push a square peg through a round hole is
what it feels like that's not trying
to make this conversation a community feel.
Um, there's been no attempt to
get the word out at places, maybe like ka
or scale where perhaps people
aren't reading their emails as much.
There has been no attempt to put other,
in other ideas out there other than reconfiguration.
Alright, that's three minutes.
Um, sorry, I'm gonna stand in line again.
Good evening. Board members.
Um, thank you for, um, I'm, my name is Emily Haynes.
I live on Stanford Street
and I have a student, a first grader at small school.
Um, I'm also the parent of a 4-year-old
and a 2-year-old who will,
who will enter the school system in the coming years.
I'm also an educator in the Portland school system.
Um, I wanna start by saying that I, I
and many other parents here tonight value equity and,
and diversity and are in favor
of practical means of achieving it.
I believe that schools do play a very important part in
supporting diversity and equity.
However, I don't believe that it's the school's job
to solve that problem alone.
I think that the board really needs to be thinking about
how do we engage with town council
and the planning department on increasing affordable housing
across the, the district.
That is one of the main reasons why we have
segregated schools in our town.
And the, and the community is not addressing it.
We have a Mahoney site that the, that the town is deciding
to create a new community center when we really need
affordable housing on the east side of town.
So that's one of the big things that I think is one
of the elephants in the room here.
Um, oh, I just lost it.
Another thing I would like to point out that in all
of tonight's discussion, some of the people
that are least considered are parents.
Uh, there was never a survey that went out
to parents asking us for our feedback on any of these plans.
There was never a communication that went out
to families about this major budget problem
and what we were looking at in terms
of potential reconfiguration of our schools.
Um, as a mother
and a teacher, I share that raising, I raised the point
that raising a young family in 2026 is
more challenging than ever.
We know that our government has put out statements
that it is harder than ever to raise children in the,
in this country, um, especially for families
with two or more children.
These proposals will crush us.
The logistical challenges could force us to choose
between equally bad options.
One, put your children on unsupervised buses
for potentially hours a day.
Children that young need access to bathrooms.
They fall asleep on buses, they lose things.
Having unsupervised busing across town
for any student is not in their best interest.
It will further disrupt our jobs
with possible crosstown drop-offs
and drop-offs at two different schools potentially
on opposite ends of town.
And if our kids are in aftercare, which my kids are
or will be, they're at potentially two different schools.
And aftercares and managing pickups in these
locations will not be possible.
Working families cannot absorb more
complication in their lives.
And that is precisely what most of these plans will create.
If these proposals will drive, these will drive families out
of South Portland and dissuade
new families from moving here.
I urge you to not consider reconfiguration for our schools.
We need to keep our community schools.
Thank you very much for your time. Three minutes. Thank you.
Hi, um, my name's Heather Willette
and I'm here tonight as a dyer parent,
but also as an educator.
Um, I've been an education for the last 18 years with 11
of those years in Portland public schools.
Um, I have two children at Dire Elementary School.
And as a parent, any
of this change feels really overwhelming.
Um, to be completely honest,
when considering like the mental wellbeing of our children
as it gets rolled out.
However, I realized that the place
that we're in a choice has to be made.
Um, and it shows tonight that extensive thought, um,
was put into the options that were presented to you today.
Um, although they're not feeling ideal to people,
I do feel like 1.8 in my mind is the most ideal.
Um, mainly due to it alleviating
the need for having early elementary
and upper elementary schools, um,
and later needs for, um,
for more budget cuts.
Um, the portables of course can be a big issue,
and that's something that was a red flag as soon
as I read it, along with the transportation across the city.
Um, the data that was presented today though shows
that skill in is the most diverse population of the schools,
which we knew and it will provide a larger savings
throughout the, the coming years.
So hopefully that would prevent us from being in this
position again next year.
Um, distributing skill in students
among the other four schools done in a planful way,
it could achieve greater overall diversity.
Um, and I'm in agreement, I'm in agreement with, um,
board member Kabisa on limiting disruption to our students,
especially the most vulnerable of the population.
I feel that's really important for us to focus on.
I say this all fully acknowledging
that I'm a dire parent, right?
If I were thinking about this as dire closing,
that's very disheartening
and I can only feel that that would be true
for any parent from any school where that would be, uh, a,
a choice for their school to be closing.
Um, I also wanna acknowledge the amount of time we have
to implement these changes.
1.8 in my mind is the best option
because we have less than six months until the start
of the start of the 26th, 27 school year,
which is coming up very quickly.
Um, I can't see how we could prepare a citywide cohort
of students to reconfigure in a way that includes pre-K one
and two four in that short amount of time in a, in a way
that will take their wellbeing into account.
Um, as a parent, I wanna reiterate that any amount
of change feels almost unbearable.
However, like knowing 30 seconds timeline, thank you.
And the options presented.
I think it's in the best interest of our students, teachers,
school staff, and family to choose a plan
that will result in long-term financial results,
while also limiting disruption to the students.
Um, respectfully to board members.
I wanna say that if you're concerned about the rights
of the diverse population,
there should be translators here available so that people
who speak languages other than English
as their first language could come up for public comments.
And I think that that would be a respectful way
to include more of our community members.
And I'm also concerned, um,
with any board members staying their position three tonight,
because I do think that, um, you need to reach out
to your constituents and make sure that you're hearing from
everyone in your districts before you state that.
My name's Brian Green. I'm a
father of four in South Portland.
After learning about the budget situation facing the
district and the ongoing exploration
around redesigning elementary schools, I researched
how similar changes have affected other districts.
My comments about key findings from peer reviewed research
regarding plans to add more school transitions
during elementary years, as well
as the environmental impacts of sending kids to schools
that are farther away from their homes.
First changing schools more often is associated
with decreased academic performance.
A 2017 study from the Journal of Education, finance
and Policy found
that school transitions in the elementary years are
associated with declines in academic achievement,
attendance engagement, especially
for economically disadvantaged kids.
A 2018 study in the Journal of Frontiers
and Psychology found reduced self-esteem, increased anxiety,
and reduced sense of belonging in students who transition
between schools more often.
Second, adding transitions makes it harder
for working parents and parents with multiple kids
with more frequent and longer commutes, parents will need
to make a, uh, who need to make it to work,
can't afford extra help and,
and can't afford extra help, will suffer the most.
A 2024 study in the journal educational policy found
that the logistical burdens of rezoning fall unevenly
with lower income families least able to absorb them.
A 2022 working paper from the Annenberg Institute at Brown
University found the consolidation causes measurable student
population declines, meaning kids stopped going to school.
Another 2022 study again, the journal Frontiers
of Psychology found the families
with more school aged children experience significantly
greater stress from school related
log logistics disruptions.
Lastly, many of the plans pre
or presented tonight would increase the number
of buses and cars on the road.
And it's really frustrating
that we don't even have any projections of how
that will look going directly.
This goes directly against South Portland state
of climate goals of reducing greenhouse gas emissions.
Budgetary restrictions would no doubt limit the total number
of bus routes to an absolute minimum, meaning longer routes
and kids on buses for inordinate stretches
of time they could otherwise spend playing or learning.
I urge a district and board to find a path
that reduces the risks of academic,
of decreasing academic performance,
hurting working families, and harming the environment.
I urge a district and board to provide data
for why these plans would improve academic performance
and community when so much peer reviewed research
points in the other direction.
Thank you for your
consideration, your service to our community.
Hi, my name is Rob Riegel. Um, my wife is Christina Grl.
She is a, uh, art teacher at both,
at both small and KA schools.
She's also a, excuse me, she's a union rep for those schools
and she's sick tonight.
So I'm here on her behalf both to, uh, speak, uh,
on behalf of her fellow teachers, fellow union members.
But I think even if that wasn't the case,
even if she wasn't a teacher, I would still have a lot
of the same questions as a, uh, community member.
I live on Settler Road in South Portland.
My wife and I both grew up in South Portland.
Um, and we love living here.
And it's just wild to me considering the skyrocketing,
uh, average home price
that we can be sitting here talking about a
budget shortfall.
It, it just seems surreal.
Um, that being said,
and I know it's not, it's not your fault,
but I think what she would demand is some transparency,
both in the previous budgets of the past few years.
How did we get here? I've heard some reasons,
including enrollment fluctuations
and increased prices, inflation.
Does anybody here in this room think that any
of those problems are going to go away anytime soon?
Are we not just gonna be here two, three years from now?
Do we think that any of those problems facing any
of the instability facing the country, the state today,
are any of those problems gonna go away?
I'd, I'd think not. Along those lines.
Um, we, we have, from
what I hear from my wife, her talking to other teachers,
teachers are stretched to the max,
especially in the special education department.
And then, you know, kids have English as a second language,
kids with special needs.
Those special needs teachers are already stretched thin.
I know they are. How do you think it's going
to help when we combine schools
and add to the workload of people who are already stretched
that thin And what happens?
I mean, I understand the financial obligations that we've,
that we're facing as, as a community.
What happens when there's, uh, a special education room
and there are 6, 10, 12 more kids than they can
handle right now?
And how is that fair to anybody?
Don't we have 30 seconds also to some extent,
like the American Disabilities Act?
Don't we have a legal obligation to take care of some
of these kids who will seemingly increasingly
need services like this?
Um, and yeah, that's all I have for now.
Thank you. Thank you.
My name is, uh, Dr. Caitlin k Foley.
My doctorate is of education.
Uh, my discipline is, uh, kinesiology in my preparation, uh,
this means I have great breadth
and depth of knowledge of physical activity
and impacts across the lifespan and mentorship in my area.
I live at 27 Massachusetts Ave.
I have a fifth grader at the middle school
and a kindergartner at Skill and Elementary.
We chose to move back to South Portland
because of the successful schools
and we specifically chose our address
for skill in elementary.
Our family has a century long connection
to the South Portland schools.
We deeply appreciate the community connections
and the attention to students on an individual basis
throughout their formative elementary school
years and addition.
Additionally, I proudly speak
of the diversity my children experience, um,
at the South Portland School District.
I'm so grateful. Our community has become much more
diversified since my time in the district.
Every day I see dozens of families walk to skill in.
I'm sure that happens at Brown and Kayla
and Dyer and Small too.
Um, as an expert in physical activity, it is well known
that parental modeling of physical activity, um,
will help children create healthy habits for a lifetime.
Consolidating and moving children
to non neighborhood schools would likely eliminate
this valuable family time.
I also think of the social wellness
of the walking drop off parents as they drop off the kids,
I see them walk home together
and that improves their social wellness as well
and building further, building our community.
Additionally for me, I read to my kindergartner
after we drop off her
sister at middle school in the morning.
So far this year we've read 19 Sophie Mouse Novellas,
which is approximately 2,536 pages for me.
This is valuable one-on-one time reading to her,
and it might be eliminated by additional driving
to bring her to a different school.
I'm sure my fellow morning car drop off.
Parents will have similar
bonding experiences with their children.
My dissertation focused on educational connections
and mentoring and support for older students.
We know that older ages, um,
that student faculty connection is
important to overall success.
I am not an expert in this age group,
but I feel strongly that if we did some quick research,
we would find that faculty student connection is still very
important for the student success at
a very young ages as well.
The current district design and student to school
and faculty ratio supports this.
I don't feel that eliminating a school supports the
faculty student connection.
A major strength of our schools is the connection
to the community and the parent-teacher organizations.
The skill and PTO works tirelessly year round
to support our students, our teachers,
and the school as a whole, as a parent,
as a middle school child as well.
30 seconds. I don't feel this connection
to the middle school PTO.
It's not a fault of the PTO,
but I feel like being part of a bigger school, it kind
of feels like maybe someone else will step up and do it.
And that I think that's a mentality
that may happen at larger schools.
My older daughter has struggled with the transition
to the larger group setting at the middle school
after having her all of her education at skilling.
I strongly believe that my younger daughter will struggle,
uh, in school with many, uh,
so many other younger children in a like catered, um,
one or two to four setting.
She won't be seeing the oldest kids be able
to model good behavior that
That's three minutes.
Thank you. I'll be back next week.
This is my first time too.
I, I just wanna encourage people,
not everybody listening is a native English speaker,
so please pace yourself
and it's better to say less so that it can be understood.
But, um, but to speak more slowly would be, uh, appreciated.
Thank you.
Hi, my name is Bill Newton. I'm a skilling parent.
Um, I don't know how I'm gonna follow that,
but I had no plan of speaking here, uh, tonight
until I saw the proposals.
Um, I am a skilling parent.
Have a kindergartner currently there
and a 2-year-old who I'm hoping one day will
be going to skill in.
Um, I really appreciated board members Smith's comments
earlier tonight as the first thing I wrote down, um,
when I started hearing about the plans was busing.
That's exactly what this plan reminded me of.
Um, and it doesn't really,
and I don't think that's a good thing.
Um, making the,
um, bra black
and brown people move across the city does not, uh,
help diversity in any way.
It feels like it's more delivering kids to
richer, um, families.
There was a phrase tonight that was said that I know it has
to be described in some way.
Um, but in terms of redistricting,
that the if skill encloses, the
kids will go somewhere based if they will be selected based
on a distribution of characteristics.
And that to me speaks to kind of the inherent, um,
inequity in this process.
Uh, couple couple other comments outside
of the, the busing, um, aspect of it
would be the environmental impact.
Uh, I don't, I didn't hear that discussed tonight.
And the lack of transportation cost estimates, um,
as it seems inevitable that those costs would have
to rise significantly.
Uh, and then one more comment on the, I guess the concept
of buses is how long will the bus rides be?
Um, it seems like it's inevitable that, um,
I've hear parents locally to skill
and that have 45 minute bus rides already.
Um, so I don't know
how long those bus rides will be if they have
to go all the way across the city. Thank
You. Thank you.
Hi, uh, I'm Tracy e
and I am a skilling, uh, parent of a kindergartner
and also of a two year-old.
So hopefully we'll be also at Skill in.
Um, and I have emailed the board about some
of my various concerns
and I wanna say that I know
what you're doing is gonna be very difficult
and hard decisions are gonna have to be made, unfortunately.
Um, I will say that we do have the privilege of walking
to skill in and I think that has been really beneficial,
not only for my child, but for us as parents.
I know, um, someone else mentioned that is it's, you know,
they say it takes a village to raise a child
and I feel like that's part of my village
and how even I learned about this deficit
or, you know, not to have said, um, was walking
after with other moms and another mom stopped
and said, Hey, did you go to the school forum?
Um, this is what's happening.
And so I also know that not everyone has that.
And I think people have spoken about
how you look out on the crowd here.
Um, we are mostly white people, um,
because this takes time, effort to get here.
Um, we unfortunately had to get a babysitter for this
and it's taking several hours.
We're missing bedtime and dinner time.
Um, and I also know those parents who are not here, um,
particularly those of you know, non-white, um,
also want what's best for their children.
And having them bus across the city will be very, um,
difficult and losing time with their children
and the children won't have time to, to play in things.
Um, one concern also is this, has this been,
or was this adequately conveyed to the union prior
to negotiations?
Um, I've heard that maybe it wasn't and that,
but also that this stuff
that was this potential issue was known beforehand.
But it sounds like board member Richardson was not aware
of this even though until
she became on the finance committee.
So I'm just kind of wondering when did this come about
and was it actually like fully conveyed
to them when they went into negotiations?
Um, and then I feel like I came into this
with discussions about the reconfiguration of two, um,
you know, pre-K to first schools
and then three, two to four schools.
And one of my concerns with
that even was the cohorts is you could make friends in
kindergarten and first grade
and then maybe your friends
don't go to the same school as you.
And so you don't get to see them for three years
because not everyone has the ability to do play dates
and see their friends outside of school.
Um, and then another concern is how are you going
to be reaching out to the parents and to community members?
Because like I said, I heard this of word
of mouth, but not everyone has that.
Um, you mentioned doing one of the sessions at Red Bank,
but if people don't know about these sessions,
'cause you do have to be able to go onto the website.
Um, and I see a lot of people here with computers,
32nd slides because that best way to look at these slides
and that takes a lot of time and effort.
So how are you going to be reaching out to them
and giving them the information so they can,
um, give their thoughts and comments?
Thank you. Thank you.
Hi there. My name is Sarah Jalbert.
I'm a parent to two current skilled students
and a 1-year-old as well.
I'm here to voice concerns about the rushed rezoning
of the elementary schools
to address the department's budget needs.
I'm in favor of keeping students in their regional schools
for as many grades as possible, and here's why.
Teachers are able to see students
as they grow through the grades.
Forming relationships with any
and all staff can make a real impact on student success.
When students feel they're cared for by familiar people,
they'll look forward to going
to school ready to learn each day.
Allowing students to grow from multiple grades at the same
school bolsters a sense of community which is difficult
to manufacture with new students shuffling
through every few years as many of us with kids
who thrive under structures
of routine will say consistency is key
to our kids when their buildings change,
their commutes change
and everything feels like it's changing.
Stress from a changing environment can muddle the
transitions between grades, making it
for a less than ideal learning environment.
When I was in elementary school in Brewer,
our district changed from neighborhood schools
to grade level schools.
Students had kindergarten at one school first
and second at another third and fourth at a third school,
and finally fifth at a fourth school
before going to middle school for grade six through eight.
I did not like the change.
I was in third grade when the redistricting occurred
and had previously attended all years at the same school.
Each year we had to learn how to navigate a new school,
find the new bathrooms, get used
to new cafeterias and playgrounds.
And I think many of us felt lost in the sea
of our now much larger grade
With the proposed rezoning, all families
with elementary aged children
and South Portland commuters could see regular
disruptions to their commute.
Perhaps numbers are just numbers to taxpayers
who don't have child children in these schools,
but these disruptions have major impact on learning.
My two school-aged children are in
grades one and three right now.
They get on the bus together in the morning
and ride home together in the afternoon.
Well, I know that middle school is just a few years away
and things will eventually change.
It seems so senseless
to send my two children two years apart to separate sides
of town when they're thriving together in
their neighborhood school.
A question for the board when anticipating declining
enrollment, have you factored in housing developments like
the proposed 208 unit multifamily complex in Mill Creek
or the 80 unit multifamily near Landry Village?
30 seconds. Okay.
Rezoning the schools affects families
and it's so important to listen
to their voices on this matter.
I implore you to look elsewhere when looking
to fix our budget issues.
This budget issue is not our children's fault,
yet reconfiguring their elementary schools
puts all the burden on them.
Thank you for hearing the concerns
of self support and the families.
Hey everyone, my name is Andy Lucha.
I'm a parent at the small school
and I had a bunch of notes on how life is a balancing act
for families with young kids, uh,
that all the other parents have
already have already told you.
I think you're hearing a pretty common refrain here from
the parents in the room.
Um, so I thought I'd share just a few additional, um,
thoughts based on the presentation.
Uh, one, uh, echoing the last, um, speaker here.
You know, there there's a constituency
that's not represented here
because it's past their bedtime, which is the kids.
And I think if you were to survey a group
of like kindergartners to first graders, I,
I'm not sure you could find a single one
on either side of town.
You know, regardless of the color of their skin
that would want to go
to a different school than they've been going to
for the first two years and have
to change all their routines, change their community,
be separated from some of their friends, you know, that
that puts the entire burden of this process on the kids.
I also think by the way, that, uh, the proposal
to eliminate skill in seems like it puts the entire burden
on families at one side of town, which happens
to be the more disadvantaged side of town already,
which obviously you just look at a map.
It seems like a terrible idea.
Um, and so I, I'd love to see to, to close some of, some
of the proposals that were not included.
I think it was 1.2, which is basically trying to
allocate the, the burden of these costs across
cost cuts across all the schools out there, which,
which is gonna be really difficult I think.
Um, one of the presenters said that we would have
to allocate them equally
or proportionally according to the number
of students in each school, which would
therefore burden the schools that are really struggling
with kids who have more special needs
or learning, uh, requirements.
I don't know why that's the case.
I don't know why we couldn't allocate some of the more
of the cuts at the schools that, that, uh, probably would,
would not suffer as much from reductions in staffing.
Um, so I think that should be considered.
Um, overall though obviously just, um, really up up here
to say that the reconfiguration plan
seems like it makes no sense.
It burdens families, it burdens kids.
I think we should find a better way. Thank you.
Hi, good evening. My name's Kate Norman.
I live on Coach Road.
I have, uh, two students at Skill
and I'm also the president of the skill
and PTAI just wanna start off
by acknowledging the really difficult position you are in.
$7 million is serious.
Understand that actions need to be taken.
I was going to spend the majority
of my time talking about the potential closure of skill in,
but sounds like that decision is
potentially not moving forward.
But I echo every sentiment that has been shared
and that the idea
of putting our most vulnerable students at risk is serious
and honestly should not have been
a proposal that was put forward.
I do instead wanna turn to
and touch on a little bit about Councilor Angelus,
your comments at the beginning of this session stating
the community is not being ignored.
The board is doing everything they can do.
Those two statements do not reflect the
experience of many families.
There's been a little proactive communication about the
magnitude of this change and what is under consideration.
A budget form did not capture
and does not capture the attention of a busy community.
Many residents, residents are still unaware
of the full scope of the budget shortfalls.
And additionally, the reconfiguration is on the table
in addition to a closure of a school.
Family, families I have spoken to are just beginning
to understand what is at stake.
This decision requires more than just our usual meetings.
It needs broad, intentional and creative outreach.
Please coordinate with the city
to get into the city newsletter.
Can't help but notice that a newsletter was sent on Friday
that did not mention this form.
Lean into social media,
get into those multilingual
communications coming from the school.
The PTAs are also here. We have a direct line to parents.
I have an email list of 300 names we can help
to spread awareness about what is going on.
If you seek meaningful engagement, we have, you have
to meet people where they are.
In order for me to vote in favor of this budget, I need
to feel confident that all
of the stakeholders have been meaningfully consulted
and informed families, teachers, staff, and the taxpayers.
And actually not just informed,
but they have been engaged in this process.
So the multilingual families, working families
and the community members without children,
but they still deeply value public education.
30 seconds. I don't believe in the reconfiguration,
but I'm willing to adjust my thinking
if we can show proof points.
So this is a long-term solution
and if we can undertake this disruption
and it will meaningfully stabilize our finances,
so we are not in another tough position next year.
I recognize this is a difficult job
and I implore you to do what is best
for our entire community. Thank you. Thank
You. Thank
you very much.
Hi, good evening. My name's Adam Thaw.
I live on Ocean View Avenue.
I have a first grader
and an incoming kindergartner at small school.
Um, I wanna start out with some gratitude.
I wanted to thank the student board members
for your questions and your experiences.
I thought that was really informative.
Also that comments from Tyler
and the participation with me from Daniel, um,
over the past few weeks just talking about these issues.
You've made yourself available and I really appreciate that.
Um, I wanna talk about the how as we think about this
as a city and how we go forward.
I wanna echo what Kate said.
We need more proactive transparency.
We need better principled ways to make this decision
and we need to look at feasibility.
Um, when I think about proactive transparency, I appreciate
that there has been forums and
you started this process sooner.
That's great. But many parents I talk
to don't know this is happening.
The board, the school, the btas have access to the parents
and they can contact them.
We need to express the urgency of what's happening.
They need to know that their children might be
going to different schools next year.
Um, that's so important from all the voices you've heard
here tonight from parents
and the concerns
that we've raised about the effects in our families
and on our children, which is also backed in data
and research that Brian Green mentioned.
And I have sent to you an email
and the lived experiences that people have shared
who have gone through these types of transitions.
I strongly oppose the effort to reconfigure the schools
because of the impacts to kids.
And that goes into
how we think about making this decision go going forward.
I want us to think about three dimensions of this. One.
Inclusion. We need to include the whole city.
All of the schools need to be aware of what's happening.
We need to hear their voices.
When we make a framework to make decision, that is a matrix
that raise different options.
I wanna see that the voices from skill and, and ka and small
and brown, we're all part of that process to decide
what adds value and what takes away value.
How are we thinking about this collectively?
And how can we get to, to that consensus together As a city
and as people who are impacted by this, um, we need
to reduce the amount of harm from this decision.
There's going to be hard choices that are made.
How do we reduce job losses from teachers?
How do we reduce disruption to students?
And no matter what, there's going to be some level
of student disruption.
Let's reduce that as much as we can
and not have that be year over year where students have
to transition schools that they didn't have
to transition in the past.
We also need to think about this from
a long-term fiscal perspective.
We should be talking to the council
and showing 30, 30 seconds what that we are doing
to make sure that they believe
that we're not gonna be back at the table in two years.
Um, the last thing is feasibility.
I wanna make sure that what we decide is possible to do.
We have a two and a half month summer.
If we have to remove every student
and every teacher in that period of time,
I'm not confident we can do it.
My last point question for the board and the school.
Why didn't we consider an option
that reconfigured boundaries with the school closure?
I think this was brought up by Tyler at the end.
I think it's a really important option.
Was going in my mind the, the entire time.
If we reduced to four schools, whichever four schools,
that's three minutes are that's three.
We should be thinking about how to improve diversity
through boundary changes.
Thank you very much.
Uh, my name is Rachel Gallo.
I have two children at small school
and I'm also a senior research associate at the
University of Southern Maine.
Um, I'm here to report the high level results
of the parent survey that were that was recently distributed
to parents of elementary school children.
This was a rapid grassroots effort
by several parents from scale and, and small.
There was not enough time
or resources to do comprehensive outreach.
It was strictly word of mouth distribution.
We would've liked more time to distribute flyers,
access listservs, and even translate the survey.
The survey was created to one, raise awareness
of the reconfiguration as a solution to the budget
and not to gather feedback on the
reconfiguration regarding equity.
The pub, this public comment cannot do justice
to the results of the whole survey in less than two weeks,
one of which was over school vacation.
We've received over 245 responses.
All schools are represented in the survey,
though we need more input from Kayla.
More detailed results have been shared with the board
and we are happy to do further analysis
or collaborate on future data analysis
or, um, collection efforts.
Our first finding was
that some parents were completely unaware
of reconfiguration being on the table.
Um, and that 12% of the respondents, only 12%
of the respondents felt like they were adequately
informed on what was going on.
So in summary, for the respondents we had, regardless
of school walking was the most common
way families get to school.
Opposition to reconfiguring,
reconfiguration is highly opposed from parents from all
schools with 85% of parents opposing
or strongly opposing,
80% predicted negative impact on their family dynamics
by separating siblings and creating child anxiety.
Oh my god, that's embarrassing. S that's not me.
78. 78% believe this would be disruptive to teachers
and 90% worried this would result in loss
of school communities and busing complications.
And 57%, 57% said it'd be disruptive
to before and aftercare.
Uh, a majority of the parents lacked confidence in the
stated, um, benefits of reconfiguration.
Only a quarter believe refi
configuration will support equity.
Only 12 um, will expect it to improve academic support
and 30% think age groupings are an improvement.
We received nearly 200 comments
and questions from the respondents.
We sent them to the board yesterday.
Um, but here are a few, you know, around saving money.
How does this work with busing class sizes? Staffing cuts.
I'm not gonna go through all of them. Public trust.
30 seconds left. And engagement is an important part
of this process moving forward.
It is clear the public needs to understand the costs,
drawbacks and benefits of changes, especially those
who often have a harder time sharing their voice.
I understand the board believes they're communicating
and we thank you for your intent on transparency.
But moving forward, additional modes
of communication need to be considered.
There is a huge difference between transparency
and effective communication.
And this was an issue with the boundaries
and configurations work a few years ago.
The community should be aware of this rationale and urgency.
It's three minutes of these proposals.
Hi, my name is Haley Runback.
I'm a small school parent of two children
and I was also a, a member of the parent survey group.
And I would like to see my time to Rachel to finish
Naming recent opportunities
as budget forum has not been effective,
this cannot be the marketing technique
for future engagement opportunities,
especially the one upcoming at Red Bank.
I sat at a table of non-English speaking parents at the
boundaries and configurations listening session at Red Bank
two years ago and they had no idea what was going on
regardless of the translation taking place.
The parent survey shows that the public wants
and deserves more information.
And lastly, I just wanna acknowledge the privilege
that I have and many of us in the room have be being able
to be here tonight, um, having childcare, um,
and that many of us have complications
with attending all the meetings.
And, and thank you for so much for your time.
And we made thank handout.
Thank you. These are also the comments.
I thank you.
How many print?
Uh, nice job with the, uh, survey. Can you hear me?
Yeah. Okay. Uh, my name is Vladimir, uh, Vladimir Corin.
Um, I live on Lowell Street. My son goes to small school.
Uh, and I think that, uh, it would be helpful just
to get maybe an anecdote of, of
what we are potentially losing.
So this morning, uh, I opened up the door
and I walked out the door and I saw Brian Green walking down
the street with his daughter Willa.
And, uh, we walked together
and we, we had, we got a chance to talk.
His daughter and my son were playing
together in the snow on the way to school.
Uh, after school we dropped 'em off.
Uh, and then we walked back together
and then we had a nice conversation for several minutes
outside of our, outside of our house.
Uh, after, uh, after school I walked back to school
and picked up my kid.
There's a community of of folks that walk there
and we all talk for a while
and we get our kid and we go to the back.
We stay, we probably stayed there for 30
or 40 minutes chatting with the parents,
having the kids play with each other in the snow.
And then, uh, eventually one
of the kids said, Hey, can we have a play date?
And, uh, we had an, an impromptu play date.
I think none of that could have happened if we were busing
the kids to and from if we were driving.
I did Previously, uh,
before moving to the street, we were briefly,
uh, a little bit further out.
And when I was driving I did not have
any of this sense of community.
Cosmo did not have, uh, this, this level of friendship.
Um, we intentionally chose this area
because we wanted be close to
the school 'cause we wanna walk.
Last year we were in Gorham and we were driving a lot.
I probably drove 10,000 miles more than I do this year.
I love not driving. I love our school and our community.
I would hate for anyone to be deprived.
The experience that we have every day.
We've traveled all over the country, California to here,
trying to find a good community and the right place
and we, we felt like we finally found it.
And so I really hope
that this plan does not go through as it is.
I think it's a very bad idea. That's all.
Thank you. Thank you.
Hello, my name is Steph BTOs.
I teach kindergarten at Skill In
and I am very proud to work at Skill in
and in the South Portland community.
Skill is at capacity.
I know firsthand teachers
and staff members are working in hallways, closets,
nooks, principal's offices.
So to take the school
and to dis disperse, it will create more of a problem.
Two of the highly proposed plans include closing skill in
which means that the district will have to purchase
or, um, loan portables, which means
we will continue to be working at
or beyond capacity building.
Portables is not a long-term plan.
When I was in elementary school,
my school was actually deemed inhabitable.
Instantly my school had to close.
We were all bused to a, uh, a closed elementary school.
And the following year, the entire, um,
elementary school was made into a giant portable.
It was only supposed to last for a couple of years,
but due to funding they could not do that.
Um, the roof began to leak.
The floors started, started to warp.
Uh, the community was finally forced to build a new school.
If we close skill in, all three
of these proposals require portables.
They're not a conducive learning environment.
That means that students who receive additional support,
such as our multilingual learners, students
who receive support through MTSS
and students who receive specially designed instruction, not
to mention going to
and from related arts classes,
will have longer transitions from leaving the portables
to go to these other learning locations.
Thus, we'll be losing out on more time in the classroom
and learning time will be impacted.
It's surprising that the building
with the most classrooms is the one
that's being considered to close.
This is not a long-term plan. Thank you for your time.
Thank you
Too much.
Hi. Um, I wasn't really planning to speak tonight,
but um, just listening in, I'm Stacy Morin.
I teach at Skill and Elementary School.
I have two children that go to school in the district, uh,
at the middle school and the high school.
Um, teaching special education is a passion.
I've been here 18 years
and right now I do teach the kind
of functional life skills developmental classroom.
So we just need to be mindful of how many classrooms we have
that are self-contained,
which means we are capped at 10 students.
Once we need to get to 11 or 12, we have to get a waiver.
Our students, these parents are also not here.
Their students are significantly in need of care and help.
And at the end of the day, they're unable to get enough care
to come here and advocate for their child and their needs.
So I'm here to say, you know, we need to remember
that look into how many programs do we have
that are self-contained.
What are the needs that these students have?
They have nursing needs, they have OT needs,
speech needs, PT needs.
And with me at Skill in, even though I'm K to two,
I still service some of my kids,
you know, within the school.
And if I dismiss them into a resource
room, I'm helping them in the hallway.
I'm helping kids that I don't have on my caseload.
I'm helping kids that are in the other special ed caseloads
or just in the hallway having a moment.
And I know they have some diversity needs
and I am there for them.
So when we disband the school, you,
when we were talking about multi-language students,
you know, just those kids can come to me,
they know I know them, they know I had them.
And it's great for them to see them, you know,
in the hallway at other times and in the classroom.
And my students themselves, we are part of the community.
We go to all the community meetings.
So, you know, making them have all those transitions would
be very difficult for them.
So part of our diversity is special education students.
They're not just, you know,
and if we add the pre-K, those kids
that we are finding in pre-K
with special education needs are probably going
to be significant needs.
They're not just gonna be a child that that's four years old
with a learning disability, not to make light
of a learning disability, but they're going to be children
with functional needs and speech needs
and significant needs if they're four years old.
And we're finding them at that age and child find.
So please take consideration all
of the special education students
and their families that are not here tonight.
They may be online, but likely they are working
and helping their child get ready
for school the next day. Thank you.
Thank you. Hi there.
Daylon Markey. I have a 6-year-old at Skill
and a 3-year-old that will be in skill in one day
or in the South Portland system.
Um, I was really hoping to hear tonight
or maybe in future meetings about the future pre-K
and how these plans will shape pre-K moving forward.
As pre-K is now, it's not an option for me.
Half day isn't an option. I work 45 to 50 hours a week.
Um, I don't love paying $400 a week for private pre-K.
Um, I won't relish doing it again.
Um, so, you know, I really would just like
to hear more about that plan.
Um, also, I wasn't planning to speak,
but I came here with an emotional bias,
but a really optimistic outlook.
And I wanted to hear more about,
um, equality.
And you know, I heard about that and I do appreciate that.
And, but what I really heard tonight was a lot of ifs
and, well, I'll think about that
or we'll, we'll consider that moving forward.
I also heard a lot of staggering figures presented
and they felt like scare tactics.
Um, they felt like presenting big numbers
to give quick bullet points.
That's not how I consume my news.
Um, it's not how
I appreciated it being presented to me tonight.
Um, I do appreciate the board asking, clarifying questions
of the people presenting those figures,
and I encourage you to keep asking those questions
until you get a full answer to the question that you asked.
Thank you.
Thank you very much.
Hi there. My name's Lila.
I'm a skill parent of a kindergarten
and another one coming soon
who hopefully will also go to skill in.
Um, my son started at a pretty small school
and I was nervous about his transition to a bigger school.
He was welcomed there with open arms.
We walked to school together as a walking school bus.
It allows kids and parents to socialize.
And I feel like my son is getting supported
and raised by our village.
He gets to know other parents
who have sometimes picked him up from school when my husband
and I are unable, aside from getting
to know other neighborhood parents, my son has gotten
to know and trust his teachers
and his teachers know him and respect him.
I appreciate the sense of community within his school.
And I think he would have a really hard time making a
transition to a different school every coup, excuse me,
every couple of years because at
that point I believe kids will stop putting in the same
effort to get to know the kids
and teachers at their new schools.
Because what's the point?
The faces will just change the next year or the one after,
and friendships will be harder to maintain.
These are more than just numbers. There are our kids.
Kids thrive on stability
and we need to support them in growing their friendships
with other kids and learning which adults they can trust.
This won't happen if their school life is disrupted
by a reconfiguration to echo many others.
I urge that parents and teachers be afforded transparency
so we can be more educated about this, the decisions
that will drastically change our family's lives.
Thank you.
Thank you very much. Hey
everyone, uh, Markowski.
I too do not plan to speak tonight,
but I felt compelled to come up here and do so.
Uh, first off, thanks for what you're doing.
This is not easy to ask. You have a hard decision
to make in front of you, so I respect that.
Um, I also wanted to remind the board chair
that there is the golf course in Wilkinson Park past Dairy
Queen about the parks. I am a dire parent,
Not a park. Not a park, it's
a golf course.
Well, come on, you can go
Swimming the golf course. It's not a
park, it's a golf course.
I can't go on the green. I'm a and
Have a picnic. I'm a walker with
two kids. I'm not an educator,
but used taking on large scale projects.
I've been concerned that a hasty decision can, uh,
be a adverse impact of the community.
And I think a lot of, uh, the community tonight raised a lot
of missing data points that we just don't have
to make an informed decision, frankly.
So I want to just encourage the board to slow your role,
look at the angles, get the community involved,
share the details and data.
I feel like we did this a couple years ago.
Nothing came of it, frankly, as a parent.
Um, when budgets get tough,
you need to make informed decisions.
You need the data, the insights,
the community backing to do so.
So I hope you guys really embrace the community,
get people involved, slow this down
and, uh, find the best way to move forward.
Thank you very much.
Hi, good evening. My name is Melinda Hull
and I am the mother of a, uh, third grader at Brown.
And, And the aunt, um, of, uh,
a student, a second grader, excuse me, at small.
Um, I did send my comments
to the board members earlier today,
but I just wanted to recap a few things here.
So in these conversations I see some
of the same points being made
around reconfiguration concerns
and the posing of alternative suggestions, um,
that are reminiscent of the last time.
We as a community traveled down the path
of potential reconfiguration work
that was paused in December, 2024.
So the district could conduct attendance zone analysis
and look at viable grade level configuration options,
as well as engage with a consultant
and multi constituent commun, uh, committee, excuse me,
to gather and examine information on magnet programs
that foster innovation and equity
and to collect information on controlled choice programs
and to include the economics of all those options.
I wonder, was any of that done between then and now?
Not by of course, the consultant,
but by district staff charged with looking at cost cutting.
If yes, can that information be shared with us?
And if it wasn't done, could we try and do some of it now?
Those two ideas were put forward in recent years
by the community and others as alternatives
to reconfiguration by grade level in the manner proposed.
Our middle school is a community school
and we are pursuing grant funding
to transform the high school into such a place.
Why not pursue it for an elementary campus too?
Given the clear research demonstrating significance, social,
economic and academic benefits to students
and communities, some of us had hoped that these ideas
and others could at least be examined
after the last reconfiguration discussion.
Recommended doing so so we'd have good
and ac so we'd all have good
and accurate information about all the options.
The one campus idea may, may make the most sense
economically long term,
and provide the biggest bang
for the buck moving towards both fiscal responsibility
and academic equity.
Not to mention the ability
to incorporate a community schools model into the elementary
experience of all of our children and families.
So let's say we were gonna explore this option.
We as taxpayers are going to be asked to approve hundreds
of millions of dollars rep repurposing Mahoney into
whatever it ends up being.
However, could we consider something different like include
grades two through four there on the Mahoneys,
on the Mahoney site with PK through one next door at Brown,
connected by thoughtful green space on paths.
30 seconds left.
If, if the city decided to collaborate
with the district on a school at the Mahoney site, could
that then open the project up
to additional sources of funding?
My point in saying all of this is I really hope
that we are not rushing
to this proposed grade level configuration,
because that's the only one that was even explored.
Not because it's the best for our kids and our teachers
and our families or the taxpayer
wallets. Thank you. Thank you,
Melinda.
That's a good idea. How you doing this evening?
Um, I live on Evan Street right over across the street here.
My son. If you could just give your name please.
My name's Charlie Fox. I live on Evan Street.
Um, my son goes to Dyer. He's in kindergarten.
We walk to school every day is
probably the highlight of my day.
Um, that 30 minutes I get to be with my son.
I work close to 45, sometimes 60 hours a week
as a business owner.
Um, I don't get to see my kid as often as I would like.
I work on weekends, so that morning is everything to me.
I walk with my neighbors who would have grandparents
and they walk with their grandchildren to school.
Um, a lot of people were caught off guard by this.
I taught a lot of grandparents today who walk
with their grandchildren and they had no
idea this was going on.
Um, it's amazing community.
The kids are playing together and walking together.
We're walking down McKinley Street.
All the kids come outta the houses.
We all all walk around the same time together.
It's something that, you know, I love
and I wish hopefully can continue onwards
as a community base for everybody.
Um, I agree that everybody needs to know more,
including everybody on the red bank side.
We need better flyers, we need better information, emails,
it needs to be put out there
that these are actually happening.
So they have voices into this also.
'cause I feel they're gonna feel the same way that we do
that they don't want to lose those moments of time walking
with their children at the same time.
Um, so I really hope that we can convey
to everybody in our community, everybody across the board
that we everybody can hear also at the same time.
Um, and not just have, you know, tonight I had to explain
to my child why I was coming here.
I picked him up aftercare
and I told him we're going to this meeting tonight.
I we're a family who is very truthful
and we tell him kind of what's going on.
We explained it to him and he immediately almost started
crying right there, saying, will I not be
with my friends next year?
That's something as a parent is heart wrenching.
My son made amazing friends this year at the school
and having that taken away from him
or possibly taken away from him is something
that I don't really want to see happen.
Um, and I feel that's a lot
of parents in this room here feel the same exact way.
I feel parents on Red Bank side are gonna feel
the same as Zach way.
I feel we are rushing into this.
I was only notified by this a week ago.
I feel we're rushing into this
and this is not something we can rush into our children's
education and our younger youth
is what's gonna be hopefully being sitting up here one day
or right here someday.
We can't be jeopardizing this.
This needs to be thoughtful process. Thank you. Thank you.
Hi, my name's Julius Hayde.
I am also a resident of Evan Street, neighbor of Charlie.
Um, I also am not planning on speaking with you.
And I just wanna put a little bit of perspective here.
I'm not an expert in this issue.
Uh, I do work in planning professionally, frequently.
Um, I'm an architect
and so I often have the privilege of seeing firsthand, um,
these very large scale processes
and how they play out in communities.
And I have seen really wonderful successful
community processes.
Um, and I just wanna emphasize
and stress that clear communication, um,
and adequate planning are critical to the success, um, of,
of really large scale changes like this.
And as I said,
this particular subject matter is not my
particular expertise.
Um, so I consulted the internet, um,
and I'm excited to share the University
of Maine is actually one of the sources that, uh,
AI pulled from, so that's wonderful.
Um, and I just, the first line says,
school redistricting typically takes one
to two years to plan and implement.
Um, so, you know,
and you know, as a, as somebody
who works in the construction field often, you know,
I'm sitting in my seat this evening
and I'm wondering, you know, would you have had
to start your permit process yesterday?
Do you even have this successfully, um, lined up
and in place with the consideration
of portables for September?
I, you know, I'm not sure what the answer to that is.
So, um, I just wanna thank you for all the work you've done
to date, but just stress, um,
that this really should have communication again,
planning and time. Thank
You. Thank you,
Mr. Dowling.
Adrian Ding, brickhill Avenue.
Um, I've lived in South Portland for about 19 years
and when I, when I moved here in 2007, one
of the first things I noticed in my neighborhood,
which is on the far west side of South Portland, was this
gaping hole in the middle of the neighborhood.
Uh, and I wondered what happened.
Uh, that gaping hole was the site
of the former Mary Marsh Elementary School.
Uh, that school had been closed around 2005.
Um, that was the much
Earlier than that.
Much earlier than that.
Yeah. Well, nevertheless, uh, it was,
it was closed at some point.
That was the neighborhood school for
what is now my neighborhood,
the West End neighborhood of South Portland.
And all these years later, um, people still speak about it.
They still say, um,
everything changed after that point.
It's never been the same and never felt the same.
Um, and when that school was, was
torn down, skilling became the focal point
of that larger neighborhood.
And even though you have to walk under multiple
interstate overpasses to get to skilling and, uh, on ramps
and take your life into your hands to get there,
people feel very deeply connected to skill in now
because as we know, people feel very connected to schools.
Um, all of that is to say is that the west side
of South Portland has suffered a lot of loss for
a long time, dating back to shortly
after World War ii, when, uh, the city council,
which at the time was known as the Board of Alderman,
decided to change how people vote so that the people
who lived in the Red Bank shipyard housing, uh,
could not have as much influence on city politics.
That's why today, uh, when we vote for a city council
or a school board member in a district, everybody
in the whole city gets to vote for that district.
It's not just the people who live in that district.
That decision was made in the 19, late 1940s, early 1950s
by the Board of Alderman,
because they didn't want renters in Red Bank to have
influence and political capital.
Um, that was a bad decision, but it is what it is.
Uh, I just want to give a little bit of the history
that I said early in their evening
that I wasn't going to to give.
But, uh, as a resident of that neighborhood,
I felt very strongly that I had to get up and,
and say those things out loud.
Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Dowling.
Lauren Shapiro, Deek Street.
I have an unpopular point to raise
and perhaps for you all to consider.
Of course, we all want pre-K, we want that for our children.
But I think the question that now exists is
how can we possibly afford it?
We can't even continue to meet the needs
of our current student body
if pre-K is not in fact required.
Should we reevaluate that need
and if expansion at this time?
Thank you for so much.
Uh, thank you so much for all that you're doing.
This is a lot for you guys and our community, so
Appreciate it. Thank
you, Lord.
My name is Hannah Sis.
I live in Channel Road and
I'll try to be less than three minutes.
I know it's really late. I
appreciate all the work you're doing.
I know these are tough choices,
but I just wanna echo what a lot of people said tonight,
which is, this feels so rushed
to pull the rug out from everyone right now without the
clarity and the answers
to really even some basic financial questions.
Um, what has also become incredibly evident
is this is our community.
Define neighborhood or community schools, however you want.
People feel so strongly about their home base
and their neighborhood school.
Um, I echo what many people said.
It's not just that I walked to school
and I know people, I know their dogs.
I know that Leo and Charlie like to be first.
I know that Sadie waits on the corner for Hattie.
I know that Peyton runs ahead with Paul
and the moms come behind with Rosie who's sick, who's a dog.
Like I know a lot of details and I'm not alone in this.
People know this about their own schools.
I have three children, a sixth grader, a third grader,
and a first grader, two of whom have been diagnosed
with mild selective mutism.
They have done really well.
But the continuity
and stability for my third grader
to see her kindergarten teacher who knows that she needs
to wait in the hall till she can find her brave voice
and answer her is worth more than I can say.
Um, and we want that for all the children, especially those
who might have had more disruptive lives
who don't have the continuity
and the stability that other people in the district have.
Um, and lastly, just the, I was cutting it close
to pick up the other day and the bridge was up
and there were 12 to 15 parents I could have easily called
that, said, Hey, can you grab my kid
and wait on the blacktop for me?
And my children would be comfortable with those people,
and the parents would've answered the call
and done it in a heartbeat.
And that's why we live here. So thank you.
Thank you, Hannah. There any other people
who would like to speak before I close?
Public comment. Okay.
Seeing none, public comment is closed. Thank you.
Um, I appreciate everybody speaking.
There were a couple questions that I did want
to just answer.
Um, one person
asked a question about have we considered the multifamily,
uh, building in Mill Creek?
That that project is a one bedroom, uh,
not considered, it's considered not, it's not going to be,
um, appropriate for families.
It's going to be appropriate
for either single people or couples.
And the Landry Village property,
the new building is 55 and up.
So those are two properties that were raised tonight, um,
that are, that will not be affecting our school.
So I just wanted to help clarify that.
Um, and again, I just wanted to say again for, uh, just,
just to keep repeating it.
We don't have a budget shortfall.
We don't have a deficit, those, that, that does not exist.
So what we have is a limit to how much money we can spend,
and we have to put a budget together by June 9th.
So, um, that's as slow as we can make the process.
That. And, and if the budget were to fail on June 9th, uh,
the board would have to reconvene
and come up with, again, a, another budget
to put out to the voters.
So the, those are the possibilities, but we,
but that, that is state law.
There will be a referendum question on June 9th on the
budget, and we,
and this board has to, um, has to adopt that.
So one of the challenges that the board has,
and I really appreciate hearing from everybody tonight, um,
but to understand
that our constituent group is the entire city,
and all the taxpayers
and all the renters of the city are the people
who we have to respond.
So we, while tonight, who we heard from
every single speaker was a parent or an educator,
and that's really important and really valuable,
but it's just not all the people to whom we have to answer.
So, um, so we're gonna keep working.
And I, um, I, I I will say, you know, we've, we've,
we've done everything we could in trying to communicate,
we'll keep trying to do better
because I can hear that there are people
who didn't feel like they knew things.
And you know, we're trying to get it out on social media.
We're trying to get it out on the school website,
on the city website, um, school calendars.
We're trying to get things everywhere and communicate.
Um, but we're, we're still failing, you know, so just know
that we're really trying and we'll keep trying
and we'll keep trying to do that.
There will be, um,
next Monday is our regular school board meeting March 9th.
And then there will be another budget workshop on the 16th,
the 23rd, and the 30th one
of those will be at Red Bank Community Center.
I don't know which one yet, have to wait
and hear about the availability,
but just in an effort to, um,
to reach out across the city.
And, um, yeah, so I,
I, uh, thank you everybody for coming tonight
and thank you for, for speaking.
And, um, without further objection,
this meeting is adjourned.